<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Introduction</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-introduction">Introduction</h2>

<p>Welcome to The Data Science Handbook! </p>

<p>In the following pages, you will find in-depth interviews with 25 remarkable data scientists. They hail from a wide selection of backgrounds, disciplines, and industries. Some of them, like DJ Patil and Hilary Mason, were part of the trailblazing wave of data scientists who catapulted the field into national attention. Others are at the start of their careers, such as Clare Corthell, who made her own path to data science by creating the Open Source Data Science Masters, a self-guided curriculum built on freely available internet resources. </p>

<h4 id="leanpub-auto-how-we-hope-you-can-use-this-book">How We Hope You Can Use This Book</h4>

<p>In assembling this book, we wanted to create something that could both last the test of time as well as address your interest in data science no matter what background you may have. We crafted our book so that it can be something you come back to again and again, to re-read at different stages in your career as a data professional. </p>

<p>Below, we’ve listed the knowledge our book can offer. While each interview is fascinating in its own right, and covers a large portion of the knowledge spectrum, we’ve highlighted a few interviews to give you a quick start: </p>

<ul><li>As an aspiring data scientist - you’ll find concrete examples and advice of how to transition into the industry.
    <ul><li>
<strong>Suggested interviews:</strong> William Chen, Clare Corthell, Diane Wu</li>
    </ul></li>
  <li>As a working data scientist - you’ll find suggestions on how to become more effective and grow in your career.
    <ul><li>
<strong>Suggested interviews:</strong> Josh Wills, Kunal Punera, Jace Kohlmeier</li>
    </ul></li>
  <li>As a leader of a data science team - you’ll find time-tested advice on how to hire other data scientists, build a team, and work with product and engineering. 
    <ul><li>
<strong>Suggested interviews:</strong> Riley Newman, John Foreman, Kevin Novak</li>
    </ul></li>
  <li>As an entrepreneur or business owner - you’ll find insights on the future of data science and the opportunities on the horizon.
    <ul><li>
<strong>Suggested interviews:</strong> Sean Gourley, Jonathan Goldman, Luis Sanchez</li>
    </ul></li>
  <li>As a data-curious citizen - you’ll find narratives and histories of the field, from some of the first data pioneers.
    <ul><li>
<strong>Suggested interviews:</strong> DJ Patil, Hilary Mason, Drew Conway, Pete Skomoroch</li>
    </ul></li>
</ul><p>In collecting, curating and editing these interviews, we focused on having a deep and stimulating conversation with each data scientist. Much of what’s inside is being told publicly for the first time. You’ll hear about their personal backgrounds, worldviews, career trajectories and life advice. </p>

<p>In the following pages, you’ll learn how these data scientists navigated questions such as:</p>

<ul><li>Why is data science so important in today’s world and economy?</li>
  <li>How does one master the triple disciplines of programming, statistics and domain expertise to become an effective data scientist? </li>
  <li>How do you transition from academia, or other fields, to a position in data science?</li>
  <li>What separates the work of a data scientists from a statistician, and a software engineer? How can they work together? </li>
  <li>What should you look for when evaluating data science roles at companies?</li>
  <li>What does it take to build an effective data science team? </li>
  <li>What mindsets, techniques and skills distinguishes a great data scientist from the merely good?</li>
  <li>What lies in the future for data science?</li>
</ul><p>After you read these interviews, we hope that you will see the road to becoming a data scientist is as diverse and varied as the discipline itself. Good luck on your own journey, and and feel free to get in touch with us at contact@thedatasciencehandbook.com!</p>

<p>— Carl, Henry, William and Max</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
