<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Drew Conway</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-drew-conway">Drew Conway</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-head-of-data-at-project-florida">Head of Data at Project Florida</h5>

<p>
  <em>Human Problems Won’t Be Solved by Root Mean-Squared Error</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After graduating with degrees in both computer science and political science, Drew found himself working at the intersection of both fields as an analyst in the U.S. intelligence community, where he tried to mathematically model the networks of terrorist organizations.</em>
</p>

<p><em>After spending a few years in DC, Drew enrolled in a political science PhD at New York University. It was here that he drew up his famous <a href="http://static1.squarespace.com/static/5150aec6e4b0e340ec52710a/t/51525c33e4b0b3e0d10f77ab/1364352052403/Data_Science_VD.png">Data Science Venn Diagram</a></em>. It was also during this time that he co-founded Data Kind, a nonprofit organization which connects data experts with those who need help. After a stint at IA Ventures as their Data Scientist in Residence, Drew joined Project Florida as Head of Data, where he uses data science to give individuals better insights into their health.*</p>

<p>
  <em>Drew is also the co-author of the O’Reilly book, Machine Learning for Hackers.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-your-data-science-venn-diagram-has-been-widely-shared-and-has-really-helped-many-people-get-an-initial-sense-of-what-data-science-is-you-created-it-a-long-time-ago-back-in-2010-if-you-had-the-chance-to-create-it-again-today-would-you-change-any-part-of-it">Your data science Venn diagram has been widely shared and has really helped many people get an initial sense of what data science is. You created it a long time ago, back in 2010. If you had the chance to create it again today, would you change any part of it?</h5>

<p>Quite a lot. I can speak a little bit about the history of it which I think is probably less glorious than people know.</p>

<p>I was a graduate student at NYU and was a teaching assistant for an undergraduate class in Comparative Politics. As a teaching assistant in those classes, your mind wanders because you already know the material.</p>

<p>It was 2010, and the idea of data science was much more primordial. People had less of a sense of what data science was. At that time I was thinking about the definition of data science. I had been speaking to people like Mike Dewar, Hilary Mason and some other people in New York and was influenced by their ideas and some of my own and came up with the definition while sitting there in class.</p>

<p><a href="http://drewconway.com/zia/2013/3/26/the-data-science-venn-diagram">The original Venn diagram I made on data science</a>, which ended up becoming quite well-known, was drawn using GIMP as the editor – the simplest, cheapest program in the world. But I’m very happy that it seems people have attached themselves to it and it make sense to them.</p>

<p>What has become more apparent to me as the years have passed is that the thing missing from it is the ability to convey a finding, or relevant information once an analysis is complete, to a non-technical audience. A large amount of the hard work that most data scientists do is not necessarily all data wrangling and modeling and coding. Instead, once you have a result, it’s about figuring out how to explain that result to people who are not necessarily technical or who are either making business decisions or making engineering decisions.</p>

<p>Really, it’s all about conveying a finding. You can use words to do that, you can use visualization to do that, or you can develop a presentation to do it. A well-rounded data science team will have someone who is very competent at this. If your organization is making decisions based on your analysis, you need to be sure they understand why.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-this-echoes-parts-of-what-weve-heard-when-we-talked-with-hilary-mason-and-mike-dewar-both-of-them-emphasized-the-storytelling-part-and-how-to-carefully-communicate-the-analysis-part">This echoes parts of what we’ve heard when we talked with Hilary Mason and Mike Dewar. Both of them emphasized the storytelling part and how to carefully communicate the analysis part.</h5>

<p>It’s something that receives the least amount of thought, but turns out to be one of the most important things once you’re doing this in the wild. Even the people who have had success in data science up to this point have just been naturally good at it, whether they were blogging about it or giving good presentations. Both Mike and Hilary are examples of people who are good at doing that. They are naturally good at it. People who are not naturally good at it can learn about it through coaching, and mentorship.</p>

<p>In just the same way, if you’re not a good coder you can become a better coder through coaching and mentorship.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-said-on-a-strata-panel-human-problems-wont-be-solved-by-root-mean-square-error-what-did-you-mean-by-that">You said on a Strata panel: “Human problems won’t be solved by root mean square error.” What did you mean by that?</h5>

<p>I think when people think about data science, or even machine learning applied to data science, people think that we have a well-defined problem, and we have our data set. We need to find a way of taking that problem and that data set and producing an answer that is better than the one that we currently have.</p>

<p>For example, Kaggle does a really good job of finding a problem definition, finding the data set, saying that it’s connected to that problem and ramping up to a competition. That way people can try and achieve a very specific thing such as having a better predictor, or having a better classifier so your errors are small.</p>

<p>But the really hard problems are ones for which we don’t have good well-defined definitions for yet. Or we recognize the problem but it’s not obvious how to find the relevant data that goes with it. Those are really hard problems to me. I’m a social scientist by training, so I think about how human behavior could be observed, what it is that I want to learn about institutions or policies or government and interventions to help keep a lid on our lives.</p>

<p>Those problems are very hard to model. So they require more creative thinking. Particularly at first, or at the onset where you have no idea if there’s even any relevant data out there. You might have to go on and run an experiment, run a data collection experiment. Then try from there. “Ok, what are the models and methods that might work in this context?” At the end, you’re going to spend a lot more time thinking, “Alright, what are the intended and unintended consequences that might result by implementing my idea?”</p>

<p>Take New York City, for example. Let’s say you wanted to optimize the snow removal routes in New York City when there’s a snowstorm. Those who were in New York when there was a big snowstorm might remember – there were a lot of people who complained because the snow ploughs couldn’t get to certain neighborhoods fast enough.</p>

<p>So technically it’s probably a pretty easy problem to solve. It’s like a rough optimization problem. You could do that. But if you take a snow plough that’s expected to be in one place and reroute it to another place, the people who live in that block will have a negative effect on optimization. Or at least there will be a perceived negative effect.</p>

<p>This is a long-winded answer, but it’s much easier if you’re only thinking about minimizing error. If you have a broader perspective on how your application or your problem or the solution to it actually impacts people, it becomes harder and therefore much more interesting and useful to the discipline of data science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-have-you-found-working-at-the-intersection-of-social-science-and-data-science-what-are-the-problems-that-youve-really-chewed-on-and-how-did-you-come-to-arrive-at-those-sorts-of-problems">How have you found working at the intersection of social science and data science? What are the problems that you’ve really chewed on and how did you come to arrive at those sorts of problems?</h5>

<p>For me, it started where you are, in my undergraduate times. I was a computer science student but I went to a liberal arts college so I got to take lots of other classes. I always found questions that were being asked in my political science or sociology classes to be the ones I was really interested in: “How do groups of people make choices? How do markets move? Why is one group of people making different choices than another group of people? What motivates people to do bad things? What motivates people to do good things?” These sorts of questions were much more interesting to me at the time than writing a faster compiler or a different programming language.</p>

<p>At that stage I actually ended up double majoring in Computer Science and Political Science so I had to write two theses. My political science thesis was back in 2004. Keep in mind that when I went to college, 9/11 was a big part of my experience. So I became really interested in terrorism and terrorist groups. I was reading trying to learn more about it. At the time peer-to-peer file sharing networks were still prominent. I was reading about how those file-sharing networks were used and the way data went through them and I observed that they were structured in very similar ways to nefarious networks or terrorist networks. I wrote my thesis on mirrors between these two things. There are weaknesses in the file-sharing network. If it was possible to replicate those weaknesses in a human network, maybe you could exploit the same weaknesses that people use to try to intercept communications on a file-sharing network.</p>

<p>I actually got invited to present that paper at West Point when I was a senior. This set me on the first part of my career path. I started my career in the intelligence community and there were people at the conference from various intelligence agencies who were really interested in the idea that you could model human behavior in the same way you model computer traffic.</p>

<p>Part of it for me was that I felt a connection to the 9/11 event and I was interested in learning more about why people would do that. So between the knowledge that I had learned in Computer Science and my interest in Social Sciences, I landed a job as a computational social scientist working inside the intelligence community. The problems I was working on there were exactly an extension of the work that got me there: understanding networks, working out how people make choices in non command-and-control structures.</p>

<p>Ever since then, I’ve always been fascinated by computer science, math, and statistics as a tool belt. I find these technical things really interesting to apply to human problems. I’m not working in the intelligence community any more, but since then, I’ve worked on my Ph.D. and have done research in the space, and have even started an organization like Data Kind, which tries to scope out the intersection of where the human problems are, where the technical talent is and then put them together. And now at Project Florida, I’ve always wanted to do take these learnings and apply them within the sensor market and with healthcare. It’s always been the classic problem that’s excited and motivated me.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-is-it-that-you-were-able-to-come-straight-out-of-undergrad-and-begin-working-in-this-domain">How is it that you were able to come straight out of undergrad and begin working in this domain?</h5>

<p>For me, I’m not sure my career path is one that I would recommend for other people. I loved my career, I can’t complain about any step. But we’ll call it an outlier situation. I was working with a lot of “reformed” academics. The people who were mentors to me had been professors at big research universities and it was very multidisciplinary. I had colleagues and bosses who were PhDs in math, computer science, economics and sociology. I was working with a large group of really smart people.</p>

<p>I started my career as a very junior analyst. The way that DC works, in a sense, is that in order to reach the next “level” you have to have at least a Masters degree. Well, I got to that point around 2007, so I was thinking about what I wanted to do. I was reaching out to my colleagues and mentors for advice. They sat me down and they said I had two choices: “You can do the typical DC thing which is to go to night school, get your Masters degree and then do the next thing. Or you could think about becoming a professional researcher. Go back to school full-time, see if you’re interested and do a doctorate.”</p>

<p>For me they were saying, “We know you, we know what you like doing. You should really consider the Ph.D. because we think it would be good for you.”</p>

<p>To be honest, I didn’t really want to do it. It’s such a huge opportunity cost. If I did it, that was five years I could have been making money and building a career. However, on their counsel I started looking around at some programs. I knew I didn’t want to go back to school for a computer science degree or a math degree, because I definitely wasn’t the greatest computer scientist or mathematician that ever lived. And also, at the end those are not the problems I want to solve. If you’re going to do a PhD., you have to contribute back to the discipline. I wasn’t interested in contributing back to those two disciplines, so I thought about various Political Science programs. I wanted to find one that was very quantitative. I ended up at NYU Political Science, which was one of three or four political science departments in the world that was heavily quantitative right from the start.</p>

<p>It was also in New York.</p>

<p>I felt that being in New York and in a large urban area opened up a lot of different things and wouldn’t limit me to focusing specifically on my academic endeavor. I could be exposed to other things while I was there.</p>

<p>I also decided that I wanted to talk more publicly about the work I was doing. Part of this is colored by the fact that for years, by being in the intelligence community, I couldn’t talk at all about the work I was doing. So moving on from there, I was really eager to start blogging or going to the media to talk about the work.</p>

<p>As soon as I got to graduate school, I started doing those things. That helped balance the work I was doing as a graduate student with running the Meetup in New York, giving talks, advising start-ups and getting involved. That doubled my work but it was all fun work and I really loved it.</p>

<p>The decision to go back to school was basically, “Well, I think this would be good for my career.” I didn’t even really know if I wanted to be a professor. It was something I was interested in, but I knew if I was going to become a professor I was going to be the kind of professor that had one-and-a-half foot in the university, and the other half foot out doing stuff.</p>

<p>From my experience at graduate school I decided I definitely didn’t want to be a professor. My father was a professor so I’m sort of a university brat. I know the lifestyle is fantastic – there’s nothing wrong with it. However, the realm of a university is teaching and publishing and not building software or data science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-given-that-you-had-the-experience-of-working-in-industry-before-going-back-to-graduate-school-do-you-feel-that-you-had-a-significantly-different-perspective-were-you-looking-at-the-academic-problems-you-were-facing-in-grad-school-differently-because-youve-had-a-chance-to-dig-your-teeth-into-them-already-in-the-real-world">Given that you had the experience of working in industry before going back to graduate school, do you feel that you had a significantly different perspective? Were you looking at the academic problems you were facing in grad school differently because you’ve had a chance to dig your teeth into them already in the “real world”?</h5>

<p>One thing I always say, and I tell this to people all the time, is that I highly recommend not going directly from undergraduate to graduate school. Even if it’s just to work for a year, I think it provides you so much more insight and experience in the kind of problems that are interesting to industry versus the problems that are interesting to researchers.</p>

<p>My early industry experience was unique in that the work I was doing in the intelligence community was split between two halves. One half was the classic intelligence aspect: studying people for short-term projects that have to be turned around in a very narrow time window.</p>

<p>The other half of my job looked much more academic. These were long-term research projects; we were working with specific agencies that had the capacity to do high-risk research. Through that experience I decided that I really enjoyed and was interested in solving hard problems. One of the problems we worked on is how to enable non command-and-control structures (e.g., organizations without coherent org charts) to make choices.</p>

<p>For example, in a command-and-control organization like the army, if you’re Lieutenant Colonel and you’re promoted to full Colonel, everybody understands how that works. However, when you’re in a non command-and-control structure, different people in each part of the network have different responsibilities. One does fundraising, one does surveillance, and one does operations. Suddenly there’s a person from the operations cell who gets captured; how does that operations cell make a choice about who will become the new leader? Or does someone get taken from another cell and worked through the system that way?</p>

<p>We’ve thought a lot about how to solve that problem and we didn’t solve it at all. However, I got really excited about the thought of solving longer-term problems. So I had another reason to go to graduate school. There was a lot of freedom to think about solving problems that I found interesting.</p>

<p>I think the basic difference there is in industry is that it’s about always solving someone else’s problem for them. Now, that’s not an absolute truth, but certainly when you’re starting your career you’re almost always solving someone else’s problem. Then when you get to graduate school, you get to think of those problems on your own. The issue is sometimes those problems are really boring or they’re not interesting because you don’t have enough experience or enough knowledge to recognize good problems. That’s where mentorship as a graduate student becomes important.</p>

<p>If you’re going to go to graduate school, you’ve got to trust in and work really hard with your advisor because if you don’t, you’re probably going to produce bad research. It’s way easier to produce bad research than it is to produce good research. In industry the objective function is set by someone else; that objective function typically is profit and the problems are usually smaller and more attainable.</p>

<p>So if you have experience on either side of that, you can be more reflective about how it might be on the other side. I think that there is a certain strictness versus a freedom component and there’s positives and negatives on both sides. It’s really about what motivates the person doing the work, what kind of stuff you like to do, and how you see your own self-worth measured in terms of what you’re contributing. Because in either case, you’re never truly independent. That’s a fallacy that’s built in at graduate school.</p>

<p>In reality, you’re the furthest possible from being autonomous during graduate school. You’re certainly more autonomous than you would be working for a big company on a team. But you have many masters as a graduate student, the least of which is yourself, and you have to be really good at maintaining your own schedule and solving a problem on your own.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-your-book-machine-learning-for-hackers-is-in-the-canon-of-data-science-now-given-that-can-we-talk-about-the-tools-that-you-have-found-to-be-useful-in-your-career-and-also-while-doing-data-science-how-do-you-discover-useful-tools-for-data-science-work">Your book <em>“Machine Learning for Hackers”</em> is in the canon of data science now. Given that, can we talk about the tools that you have found to be useful in your career and also while doing data science? How do you discover useful tools for data science work?</h5>

<p>Personally, I am not as much a lover of languages as some computer scientists are. Have you ever heard of the Strange Loop Conference in St Louis? It’s in St Louis every year; it’s a fantastic conference and I highly recommend it. But it’s for people who love tools and love programming. So I went there and was doing an introduction to machine learning programming. I found I was very much a fish out of water there. I was surrounded by people who I respect and who do interesting work and all they cared about talking about was the hot new programming language.</p>

<p>So my approach to tools is: is the cost-benefit of me taking the time to learn the tool going to have a significant impact on getting my work done more efficiently or effectively?</p>

<p>For example, I’m now known as an R programmer because my book heavily uses R. The truth is, I’d never written a line of R code before I got to graduate school. I was a Java, Python, command line programmer from undergraduate, along with a little bit of MATLAB. When I went to graduate school all the statistics classes were taught in Stata. It’s a point-and-click statistics program and you have to play by the rules. Eventually what the program allows you to do is, you have to use this highly stylized, domain-specific language for Stata called Mata. During graduate school, we were writing our own optimization functions in Mata. I was looking at the syntax and I didn’t know how I was going to do it. It was so far afield from any relevant training I’d had in computer science. So I raised my hand and asked, “Can we do our problems in R?” And the guy teaching the class said, “Sure, I don’t care.”</p>

<p>Since I’d never programmed anything in R, I set out to teach myself how to program in R simply so I could finish my problem sets for my Intro to Statistics class. For me, once I’m committed to doing it I really want to learn it all and go really deep.</p>

<p>I want to point out that I’m building up a little bit and giving you a false sense of the binary nature of this tool choice. I’d known for a while that R was a language that had a lot of things in it that would be very useful for me. But it has a very tricky syntax and it’s not designed well as a language. So it’s a little bit of a steep learning curve at the beginning, but once you get over the hump you can do these wonderful things very quickly.</p>

<p>It was the same thing for me with JavaScript. No one in their right mind will ever ask me to build a website. I don’t do that, it’s not what I’m good at. But, I got to learning it eventually when I was blogging more often. I was so tired of posting an image file of a graph I’d drawn; it would be much more interesting to have some interactivity where the image or the graph wouldn’t just answer the first order question: what is the structure of the data? But that it could also answer the second order questions: Who is this point? Why do we see what we see?</p>

<p>My entire motivation for learning JavaScript was so that I could use d3. All I cared about was being able to create interactive visualization. There’s a useful tool out there that I don’t understand how to use, so I’m going to learn it so that I can use it. And now, for me, – the worst JavaScript programmer in the world – everything to me is a d3 problem. You could ask me to create a simple online form where I’m collecting your address and I would use d3. I don’t really understand any other way.</p>

<p>I learn something through trying to solve a problem. In that process I brute-force my way into having a better understanding.</p>

<p>I’m the same way with mathematics and statistics: I learned probability theory, calculus and linear algebra. I was interested in solving a problem and those were the tools I needed to learn. I didn’t have a pure love for those things. Some people love math and love to learn about math. I think it is beautiful, but I’m not an artist. I’m more of a mechanic.</p>

<p>I think that’s powerful and pertinent for people who feel they can’t get started doing the things they want because they haven’t checked all the technical boxes. It seems like another way to do it is actually go into what is the problem you want to solve. Since we cannot solve the problem because of a particular tool or medium of expression, then go and learn how to do a particular part. You’re always told to solve the problem first.</p>

<p>That was our motivation for <em>“Machine Learning for Hackers”</em> too. People who are sitting in a job who are now being asked to run a classifier are asking themselves: What’s a classifier? One way to learn what a classifier is, is to go and read Hastie and Tibshirani, or some classic machine learning text, and try and beat yourself up over all the notation in that book. 90% of people don’t have the time or don’t want to have to read that. A better way would be to say, “Here’s a problem you’re trying to solve. Here’s how you solve it. Here’s a tool that will help. Let’s open up that black box a little bit. Explain to you a little bit. Not talk about the math. If you care to learn there are other references, you can go to. But it’s not a must. So <em>“Machine Learning For Hackers”</em> is written around 12 problems that we try to solve. That was the motivation. It was like writing a book that I wish I’d had before I went to graduate school.</p>

<p>I will say it’s an exciting time. There’s a lot of opportunity for people to build that landscape. It’s very early days; people still don’t know what we’re talking about when we say data science exactly so there’s a lot of opportunity.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-the-exciting-data-related-things-that-youre-seeing-right-now-in-nyc-hows-the-data-ecosystem-evolving-in-new-york-and-what-are-the-parts-of-it-that-you-find-exciting">What are the exciting data-related things that you’re seeing right now in NYC? How’s the data ecosystem evolving in New York, and what are the parts of it that you find exciting?</h5>

<p>I’m very biased in thinking that New York is the best place in the world to be doing this work. The reason I think that is, if you look at the history of any big city, they have anchor industries that by and large define the city itself. You can look through a list of American cities and see that. If you look at Silicon Valley – the technology industry has always been the anchor for Silicon Valley. There, the focus has been on innovation, software engineering, hardware engineering and how to build better machines, better pieces of software.</p>

<p>In New York, the anchor industry has always been finance, media, advertising, entertainment and to a certain extent, higher education. Those anchor industries have always been about data. As a result, what started as a nascent community in New York has gotten bigger and bigger and has been heavily influenced by the fact that everything around you that’s happening is pivoting off of data; that’s how everyone in the city makes their money. So there’s billions and billions of dollars that go through New York City every day that are really a function of data science.</p>

<p>Thus, the data science community in New York benefits incredibly from its history. Now we have people who care about writing software, which is different from the same anchor industries that have existed in New York. However, these people still benefit from the huge talent pool and the huge amount of money in the city. Therefore it’s no surprise to me that the data science community is growing very, very quickly. People are moving here to do this work because in a sense it’s always been here, it’s just now that people are paying attention to it more, because it’s not the boring anchor industry that we’ve always known about.</p>

<p>The other piece that I’ll say for New York as opposed to other places is that we benefit tremendously from our geography. For better or worse, Manhattan is a tiny island that seven million of us live on. It was easy for me when I was in NYU to take a subway up to Columbia or walk up to Union Square. It really galvanized our community because people were just close to each other. I could have lunch with Mike Dewar if I wanted. That’s great.</p>

<p>Whereas if you go to other places, particularly Silicon Valley, it’s just so geographically spread out that if I worked in San Francisco and I wanted to go out for lunch with someone from Mountain View, it’s an hour-long drive.</p>

<p>Likewise, if I wanted to go to a meetup in San Jose but I worked in the Mission district, it’s a pain in the ass. You can’t do that. So it becomes much more disparate out there. If you look at the community as it exists out there, it is very broken up. I think that hurts them because community for data science is really all about sharing ideas.</p>

<p>It’s much more collaborative in that way. I think New York has had a history of that through different industries.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-right-the-density-of-the-networks-that-you-are-interacting-with-is-a-huge-factor-in-terms-of-the-information-exchange-of-ideas-and-how-cross-disciplinary-you-can-be">Right. The density of the networks that you are interacting with is a huge factor in terms of the information exchange of ideas and how cross-disciplinary you can be.</h5>

<p>We tried to institutionalize that with Data Gotham in a sense. Data Gotham is the conference that Hillary and I were doing, and people seemed to like that. Now there are other geographies that are trying to do a similar thing. For example, DC has got one. Similarly, there are big data science conferences in Silicon Valley.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-gave-a-talk-recently-where-you-made-people-stand-up-and-promise-to-hire-more-social-scientists-what-advice-do-you-have-for-people-who-have-both-a-social-science-and-a-computer-science-background-and-who-want-to-go-into-data-science">You gave a talk recently where you made people stand up and promise to hire more social scientists. What advice do you have for people who have both a social science and a computer science background and who want to go into data science?</h5>

<p>The piece of advice that I would have would be to continue following this track. You’re a social scientist and you care about human problems and the specific genre of those problems that triggers your interest. If you have a desire to solve a problem from the world of social science using the skills of your computer science, you need to dive pretty deep into whatever the technical tool is that you care about. I talk to a lot of social scientists who are thinking about learning Python or R and they’re not sure which one to pick up, but just dive deeply into one of them.</p>

<p>It doesn’t make any difference. Just pick one, use it and learn from your mistakes, but make sure you’re asking intelligent questions.</p>

<p>You’re either trying to learn something new or you have an interview or a question that you ask that you don’t know the answer to and you can say, “I tried this, but I wasn’t quite sure so I went back and tried something different.”</p>

<p>A piece of motivation I would give people is that sometimes others say to me, “You’re so unique, no one else can make the transition from social science to data science today?”</p>

<p>That’s absolutely wrong.</p>

<p>The problems that you care about, people will pay you lots of money to work on. Every way that an internet company makes money is by humans making choices; the choice to buy something, the choice to click on something, to share something, to connect with someone.</p>

<p>All those things are questions that are fundamental to the social sciences. So you already have all of the training necessary to identify the problems that are out there in the real world. Now all you have to do is figure out how to solve them using the tools from an industry.</p>

<p>Don’t think you can’t do it because, the reality is that you’re already way ahead of the game. Now you have to learn the easy stuff. The hard stuff you already know. Go learn these things, and then get better at it.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
