<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Riley Newman</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-riley-newman">Riley Newman</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-head-of-data-science-at-airbnb">Head of Data Science at Airbnb</h5>

<p>
  <em>Data is the Voice of Your Customer</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Riley Newman paid his way through college at the University of Washington by being part of the US Coast Guard. After graduating with degrees in economics and international studies, Riley pursued graduate studies in the UK at the University of Cambridge, before he was called back to the US by the Coast Guard.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After working for a few years in economics consulting, Riley met the founders of Airbnb, and was drawn to their vision and focus on culture. He ended up joining Airbnb as one of the early employees.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Now, Riley is the Head of Data Science for Airbnb where he data science teams using data data to listen to customers’ voices and desires.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-explain-a-bit-about-your-background-and-how-you-came-to-airbnb">Can you explain a bit about your background and how you came to Airbnb?</h5>

<p>I went to college in Seattle where I majored in international politics and economics. Halfway through my time there, I realized the value of statistics for understanding social trends better. This was something I deepened in grad school, and wanted to pursue in a PhD, but I had joined the Coast Guard in undergrad to pay for school and they called me back from the UK after my master’s. So I came home to the Bay Area with the plan to get some experience working with data while completing my Coast Guard obligation and then planned to head back to the UK for the PhD.</p>

<p>I spent three intensive years working with a group of economists that were modeling the 2008 recession. One of them had a degree in computer science and taught me the value of automating analytical processes, which I found intriguing. When the time came to leave for the PhD, I was torn - I only wanted to do it for the technical training; my heart wasn’t in academia, and I was a bit tired of consulting. Serendipitously, I met the founders of Airbnb through a mutual friend, right as I was struggling with this.</p>

<p>There are a couple of things about Airbnb that resonated with me. First and foremost, the concept behind the company. In undergrad, I read a lot about globalization and the growing interconnectedness of the world; also about the fundamental sustainability issues associated with this trend. Airbnb struck me as a solution - it would facilitate more travel and bring international communities together without requiring the construction of additional structures.</p>

<p>I was also attracted to the founders’ focus on culture. This is something I hadn’t experienced in previous roles. They placed so much value on the sense of camaraderie on the team - more so than high school and college lacrosse teams, Coast Guard units, or the consulting firm - and the impact that brings to our work. Looking back, I think this is the “secret sauce” of Airbnb’s success.</p>

<p>Finally, I was excited about helping to build something. As a consultant, I had exposure to a wide variety of problems but, at best, we could convince the client that our work was actionable. At Airbnb, I would be able to follow the analysis all the way through to impact. And startups are fast-paced environments where you can see the impact of your work on a daily basis. That was really exciting to me.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-does-this-tie-into-the-industry-buzz-around-big-data">How does this tie into the industry buzz around “Big Data”?</h5>

<p>“Big Data” is such a common term these days. I heard a joke recently, “What do big data and teenage sex have in common? – Everybody is talking about it. Nobody knows what it is. All their friends say that they do it, so they say that they do it too.”</p>

<p>Like all buzzwords, Big Data is getting tiring. But I met with a more seasoned data scientist recently who described the field in the ‘80s and ‘90s - there was much less data so they needed to use advanced statistical methods to identify simple trends. These days, with the volumes of activity web companies are able to generate, and the depth of storage facilitated by technologies like Hadoop, we’re able to gather and make use of much more data. So it’s more of a question about how to sift through it all. I think this has made computer science degrees that much more valuable.</p>

<p>I have a data scientist friend whose resume begins with three things he firmly believes: more data beats better models; better data beats more data; and the 80/20 rule. I couldn’t agree more.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-i-think-that-is-a-really-good-introduction-as-to-what-you-think-data-science-is-i-want-to-go-back-to-something-that-you-mentioned-earlier-your-masters-degree-was-in-economics-is-that-right">I think that is a really good introduction as to what you think data science is. I want to go back to something that you mentioned earlier; your Master’s degree was in Economics, is that right?</h5>

<p>Yes, I was in the applied economics department at Cambridge. My research was in the field of economic geography/spatial econometrics.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-many-people-weve-interviewed-have-their-phd-or-masters-in-physics-statistics-math-or-computer-science-youre-one-of-the-few-data-scientists-weve-talked-to-with-an-economics-background-do-most-people-on-your-team-tend-to-come-from-backgrounds-in-the-hard-sciences-or-are-the-social-sciences-represented-as-well">Many people we’ve interviewed have their PhD or Masters in physics, statistics, math, or computer science. You’re one of the few data scientists we’ve talked to with an economics background. Do most people on your team tend to come from backgrounds in the hard sciences or are the social sciences represented as well?</h5>

<p>Everyone on the team has some degree of quantitative training but I like having a wide variety of backgrounds because this brings different skill sets and approaches to solving problems. For example, computer scientists are great at scripting automated solutions and productionizing models; statisticians ensure our models are rigorous; physicists are very detail-oriented; and economists can build frameworks for understanding problems. Airbnb is particularly interesting to economists because of our two-sided marketplace, which lends itself to modeling supply and demand, and looking for ways to make our markets more efficient.</p>

<p>But the key thing is that everyone on the team is able to drive impact in the company through the cultivation of insights drawn from data. I’m less interested in what people studied in undergrad than in their ability to do this successfully. However, this requires a solid grasp of statistics, experience in coding, and great communication and problem-solving. Our interview process exposes these skills very well, so we’re able to consider people from less traditional backgrounds.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-i-agree-with-you-that-there-isnt-necessarily-one-particular-field-that-data-scientists-come-from-however-it-does-seem-like-most-people-come-from-certain-fields-that-tend-to-teach-some-of-the-most-relevant-skills-building-on-that-what-would-you-say-are-some-of-the-most-valuable-or-relevant-skills-that-someone-in-academia-should-build-right-now">I agree with you that there isn’t necessarily one particular field that data scientists come from. However, it does seem like most people come from certain fields that tend to teach some of the most relevant skills. Building on that, what would you say are some of the most valuable or relevant skills that someone in academia should build right now?</h5>

<p>Many people coming into data science from academia have honed their ability to think mathematically or statistically and, to some extent, work with data. The big division that I see is the ability to lend those skills towards problems that will result in an actionable solution. In other words, the types of questions they ask are as important, or more, than the methodology behind solving them. In their research, they focus on why something is the way it is or how it works; in industry we’re more interested in what we should do. If the how or why lends itself to answering this, great. But if nothing changes as a result of your work, then it wasn’t that valuable.</p>

<p>When we ask other data scientists that question, we hear about technical skills like Python and programming. We don’t hear as much about extracting actionable insights.</p>

<p>I’m not saying that those aren’t relevant; I’m presupposing that anyone hoping to generate actionable insights from data has the ability to work with the tools of the trade. At Airbnb, we mostly use Hive, R, Python, and Excel.</p>

<p>When we interview people, our process is very transparent (see Quora post on this,<a href="http://www.quora.com/Airbnb/How-does-Airbnb-hire-data-scientists"> here</a>). We give candidates a day to solve a problem similar to something we’ve faced, using real (but anonymized) data. They spend the day seated with the team and are treated like anyone else, meaning they can collaborate with anyone. At the end of the day, we have them walk us through what they found and tell us what we should be doing differently as a result. This is too tight of a timeframe for someone to learn a tool while trying to use it to solve the problem. Their time needs to be completely focused on getting to that actionable insight.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-continuing-along-that-vein-youve-been-talking-a-lot-about-data-scientists-coming-from-a-masters-or-a-phd-im-also-wondering-about-your-opinion-of-people-coming-in-with-a-bachelors-in-a-quantitative-field-or-similar">Continuing along that vein, you’ve been talking a lot about data scientists coming from a Master’s or a PhD. I’m also wondering about your opinion of people coming in with a Bachelor’s in a quantitative field or similar?</h5>

<p>People can absolutely break in with just a Bachelor’s. We shifted to the interview model I described earlier because we realized our image of a data scientist was yielding false negatives. If you have the right mindset, a decent understanding of statistics, and can use SQL and R, you’ll be able to get a job.</p>

<p>This is particularly true in younger startups. When I think back to the early days of Airbnb, we were able to squeeze a lot of growth out of a simple ratio. If I spent a month building a perfect model, I would have wasted 29 days. As a company matures, so does (hopefully) its understanding of its ecosystem. So there’s a need for more sophisticated approaches.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-started-at-airbnb-when-it-was-in-a-really-early-stage-now-youre-at-the-point-where-its-growing-very-fast---its-become-a-large-company-what-are-some-of-the-ways-youve-seen-that-transitioning-into-the-work-that-you-actually-do">You started at Airbnb when it was in a really early stage. Now you’re at the point where it’s growing very fast - it’s become a large company. What are some of the ways you’ve seen that transitioning into the work that you actually do?</h5>

<p>I see this transition shaping our work in two ways. First, the team is big enough now that we’re able to go much deeper into problems. In the past, we were jumping from one fire to the next, so we weren’t able to invest large amounts of time into a single problem. And that’s natural for a startup. But as the team has grown, we’ve been able to focus on some of the key topics for the business and understand them more deeply. We also now have people on the team building data products, which is exciting.</p>

<p>Second is the democratization of information. We’re not the only team that has grown over the last few years and everyone is hungry for data to guide their work. So we have to find ways to remove ourselves from the process of answering basic questions. The last thing you want to be is the gatekeeper of information because you’ll spend all of your time responding to ad hoc requests. So we’ve invested a lot in the structure of our data warehouse and the tools used for accessing it so that it’s intuitive to people with less experience working with data.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-do-you-think-are-some-of-the-most-fundamental-ways-in-which-data-science-can-add-value-to-the-company">What do you think are some of the most fundamental ways in which data science can add value to the company?</h5>

<p>I think data can add value everywhere. It’s the voice of your customer - data is effectively a record of an action someone in your community performed, which represents a decision they made about what to do (or not do) with your product. Data scientists can translate those decisions to stories that others can understand.</p>

<p>We spend a lot of time with our product team, which is the most traditional place for a data scientist. There’s a wide range of work happening here. For example, our trust and safety team builds machine learning models to predict risk and fraud before it takes place. They also have to think about ways to measure intangible things, like the strength of trust between people in our community so we can identify ways to improve this.</p>

<p>We have other people working on matching guests and hosts, improving the model behind our search algorithm and uncovering new features to improve the match. A while back we published a blog post about this <a href="http://nerds.airbnb.com/location-relevance/">here</a>.</p>

<p>With our mobile team, we try to uncover opportunities for improving the app. One guy on the team looked at the probability of performing an action on the app relative to how far away that feature is from the homepage. This obviously showed that the more buried something is, the less likely it is to happen - but it’s a framework the mobile team can now use to think through the structure of the app.</p>

<p>But we don’t just work with product. We think about user lifetime value and growth opportunities with our marketing team, operational efficiency with our customer support team, and we’ve even been chatting with our HR team about how they can leverage data to better understand recruiting and career growth.</p>

<p>I try not to segment our work by stakeholder; rather I look at the key drivers of the business and try to figure out what problems need to be solved in order for Airbnb to be better, and then figure out who is in the best position to use that information.</p>

<p>Airbnb is a transactional business so there’s a funnel we can break apart and analyze. And getting back to the concept of data being the voice of the customer, we always start by looking to our community for advice on what to do next. At the top of the funnel we try to understand how people are hearing about Airbnb. We can use online and offline marketing to drive this, emphasizing growth where we think there’s a strategic opportunity or where we’re seeing positive ROI (return on investment). For this, we begin by looking to our community for ideas; for example, where many people are searching for places to stay but we don’t have enough supply to accommodate them. If this isn’t an anomaly (e.g. one-off event), it represents an opportunity for growth.</p>

<p>Next is the experience people have when they come to our site. There’s a lot of A/B testing here, looking for ways to make it more intuitive and satisfying to a person of any demographic, anywhere in the world.</p>

<p>After that is the offline experience, which is tricky because the data behind this isn’t as rich as site usage. But we can get a lot from the reviews people leave each other - a combination of quantifiable ratings and NLP we can perform on the text of the review.</p>

<p>Finally, we look at what we can do to get people to come back and try it again. Mostly, this means improving each of the steps above, but we think about experiences people have with customer support or community groups as a way of staying connected.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-the-final-thing-i-would-love-to-get-your-perspective-on-is-just-looking-towards-the-future--where-do-you-think-the-future-of-data-science-is-and-where-do-you-think-we-are-relative-to-what-data-science-could-be-in-the-future">The final thing I would love to get your perspective on is just looking towards the future.  Where do you think the future of data science is and where do you think we are relative to what data science could be in the future?</h5>

<p>I think we’ll see a lot of growth on the tools front. It’s amazing how quickly Hadoop and Hive have matured just over the last few years and there are new and exciting technologies emerging almost daily. So I’m hopeful that we’ll eventually have lightning-fast tools that can work with data of any size.</p>

<p>I also think data logging will develop a lot, because people are aware that you only focus on what you can measure, and you only measure what you can log. So questions like we have about the offline experience will hopefully get easier to answer as data becomes more ubiquitous.</p>

<p>Every now and then I see an article about the field of data science disappearing to automation. In effect, the tools get so good that you don’t even need to analyze data; the insights are just there waiting for you. While this may be partially true with the growth of machine learning, I don’t think it will ever fully be the case. Good data science is more about the questions you pose of the data rather than data munging and analysis.</p>

<p>But with that in mind, I can imagine the field of data science opening up to people that are less technical. As tools get more sophisticated and easy to use, we’ll see more people getting excited to work with data. We’ve already observed this at Airbnb, where we train everyone in the company to use SQL. As I mentioned earlier, you don’t want your data science team to be the gatekeepers of all information. We want everyone to be able to interact. I love watching people with no background in statistics or CS wrapping their minds around the basics of working with data. They get so excited, then they get curious. And that frees us up to focus on interesting problems that will impact the business.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-this-sounds-like-the-democratization-of-data-science">This sounds like the democratization of data science.</h5>

<p>Exactly. It’s happening today at Airbnb, and I bet we see a lot more of it in the future.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
