<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Michael Hochster</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-michael-hochster">Michael Hochster</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-director-of-data-science-at-linkedin">Director of Data Science at LinkedIn</h5>

<p>
  <em>The Importance of Developing Data Sense</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Michael Hochster’s path into the field of data science took a series of winding turns. After graduating from high school, Michael believed himself to be done with math. Yet, he eventually received his bachelors in pure mathematics from UC Berkeley.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After graduating and seeking something more practical, Michael entering law school, but quickly learned that it wasn’t for him. After leaving law school, he eventually ended up enrolling in the Statistics PhD program at Stanford, despite having minimal exposure to statistics.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After some time spent in industry, including stints at a pharmaceutical company, a web startup, Google and Microsoft, Michael became the Director of Data Science at LinkedIn.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>While we interviewed Michael when he was in his role at LinkedIn, he has since become the Director of Research at the music company, Pandora.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-your-background-spans-both-pure-mathematics-at-the-undergraduate-level-law-studies-and-then-a-phd-in-statistics-how-did-that-happen-can-you-talk-a-little-bit-about-that-process">Your background spans both pure mathematics at the undergraduate level, law studies and then a Ph.D. in statistics. How did that happen? Can you talk a little bit about that process?</h5>

<p>I have never been great at long-term planning for anything, so I’ve always followed my nose. Even the decision to go into math in the first place – I’d decided at the end of high school that I was finished with math and that I didn’t really enjoy it that much. But I kept on taking just one more class in college. Then at a certain point, that was the only thing I had taken enough classes in to have a major. So I ended up majoring in math. I did end up liking it a lot, but that wasn’t a directed decision.</p>

<p>I was mostly interested in the pure math. My dad is a mathematician so that might have something to do with it. More than anything, I really liked the fields of abstract algebra, topology, logic, and set theory. I didn’t take any statistics courses as an undergraduate, although I studied probability if that counts.</p>

<p>Then at the end of college, my thought was, <em>“This is too abstract. This is fun, but I need to do something connected to the real world.”</em> At that time, I didn’t see math as something that was going to lead me to a connection with the real world. So I speculatively decided to go off to law school with the reasoning: <em>“I’ll probably be able to find something useful and interesting to do with this.”</em></p>

<p>Law seems to have a logical aspect, which is similar to math in some ways.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-im-guessing-that-the-logic-part-translated-from-math-to-law-very-well">I’m guessing that the logic part translated from math to law very well.</h5>

<p>Well, that’s what I thought. There’s a superficial similarity: it’s reasoning. It’s making your career out of reasoning. I always liked the reasoning part of math; it was one of the more appealing aspects. This was the story that I told myself when I went off to law school.</p>

<p>So I went to law school for a year and it was a bit of a mixed bag. I did like law school; I enjoyed the classes and liked my fellow students. But at a certain point, I started realizing that the <em>“I will probably find something interesting to do with this”</em> thinking wasn’t going to pan out if I didn’t have a real plan. It seemed like everybody was defaulting to corporate law. If you were taking the next step up the ladder, you went to a good law school, you went to work at a good firm, and then you became a partner.</p>

<p>So there was a certain point during the summer when you were supposed to find a law firm for an internship. As I was sitting in these interviews explaining to the interviewers why I wanted to work for their firm over the summer, I realized that I didn’t really want to do that. I didn’t really know what I did want to do and it seemed misguided. I was just going down a path that didn’t make sense.</p>

<p>I didn’t know what I was going to do next, aside from not-law-school. I did have a friend who was doing a Ph.D. in statistics at Berkeley and I got in touch with her. She told me about some of the things she was working on (she’s now a professor of Biostatistics at the University of Florida). It just sounded interesting, at least more interesting than the things I was doing. Again, this was completely speculative. I didn’t know anything, but I just thought, <em>“I know some math so I’ll probably be able to pick this up.”</em></p>

<p>So I started applying to graduate schools in statistics and took some time off. I was a temp for a while. Eventually, I got into graduate school. It was funny because all I had was a general idea that I wanted to do something connected to the real world. I wanted to use my math background, but I didn’t know anything. I didn’t know what confidence interval was, I didn’t know what a t-test was. I didn’t know anything.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-did-you-find-the-statistics-graduate-school-experience-to-be-more-closely-aligned-with-what-you-were-expecting">Did you find the statistics graduate school experience to be more closely aligned with what you were expecting?</h5>

<p>Graduate school was rough for me, because of my lack of background going in. I didn’t understand the point of a lot of things we were studying. In grad school, you immediately launch into theoretical statistics; you don’t really have any idea about its applications. Unbiased minimum variance estimator? Who cares?</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-seems-like-you-still-had-the-question-of-what-is-this-applied-for">It seems like you still had the question of, “what is this applied for?”</h5>

<p>Yes, in the end, the *“I want to do something connected to the real world” *fell by the wayside, in the sense that I was most comfortable doing math. Even though my math was a little rusty at this point, my graduate school experience resulted in my being most comfortable in the theoretical side of statistics where I could prove theorems and know I was getting the right answer. That’s the gratification you get from math.</p>

<p>I ended up, first of all, being very far behind in understanding the point of statistics. Ultimately I fiddled around with it and tried to work out what to study. I ended up in something that is very theoretical. Which I enjoyed in a way, but it didn’t have the <em>connected-to-the-real-world</em> feeling. It was very tenuous.</p>

<p>It wasn’t until I entered the workforce that I started understanding what statistics were useful for. It was a pleasant surprise that I actually like the job, and am well suited to it. I’m more interested in working out how to do useful things with data than I am in proving theorems. It was only after school was over that I started to figure out it was a very good fit for me. It was accidental.</p>

<p>Even after having finished the Ph.D., I felt I was going up the next rung of the ladder. You get your Ph.D. from a good school and then you want to get a postdoc at a good school or a tenure track position, that’s the next step up. On top of that, both my parents are academics, so that path seemed natural to me. And I wasn’t too well-informed about other options. But in the end, it was clear to me that I wasn’t passionate enough about proving theorems in theoretical statistics to make that my livelihood.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-sounds-like-from-your-story-that-after-you-finished-your-phd-you-then-evaluated-your-options-and-said-i-dont-really-want-to-go-down-the-full-professor-route-is-that-correct">It sounds like from your story that after you finished your Ph.D., you then evaluated your options and said, “I don’t really want to go down the full professor route.” Is that correct?</h5>

<p>It was a mixture of things, that’s a somewhat nice revision of it. I applied for a few things, didn’t get anything. Then it became a question of, <em>“should I really press hard and apply and go to a place where I may not really want to live? Or should I think about what else I can do?”</em></p>

<p>It wasn’t that clear. This was a time when a lot of people were going into finance. You could go into the pharmaceutical industry. That seemed about it. It wasn’t like you type “data science” into a search engine and you get fifty million jobs. I was looking for statistician or quant, something or other. I applied for some finance jobs and I ended up meandering into this position as a biostatistician for a pharmaceutical company.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-was-that-was-the-first-time-you-were-confronted-with-real-data">Was that was the first time you were confronted with real data?</h5>

<p>It was an interesting experience. Again, I was going in as with every step, very ignorant. I still think especially here in the Valley, people don’t appreciate the huge role traditional statistics plays in the pharmaceutical industry. These companies employ armies of statisticians who are really good people. All this A/B testing that’s so in vogue now has been thoroughly worked out in the pharmaceutical industry. All the philosophical hand wringing: “can you peek at the data,”  “Bayesian versus frequentist” and looking at subgroups. Those people have really thought about this. So that was fun for me.</p>

<p>I started out at Schering-Plough, a pharmaceutical company in New Jersey, where statisticians were divided into preclinical and a clinical side. I started in the preclinical group at Schering-Plough, which was statistical consulting for the scientists researching new treatments. That was the role. So it was very open-ended and some of it was interesting. This was when gene microarray technology was first getting started. They had acquired a microarray company and there was some interesting data there.</p>

<p>The stuff didn’t work very well. The errors were huge and they needed some statisticians to work it out. They may not have been aware of this, but they needed statisticians to estimate the signal-to-noise ratio. There was a lot of explaining of t-tests to scientists as well. It was a mixture of things.</p>

<p>The clinical side had way more statisticians, since it was all about the design of clinical trials that would ultimately end up as submissions to the FDA. That was the more serious side of the business. The research scientists could get along without us to a large degree. However, doing analysis that ends up as an FDA submission was a pretty big deal.</p>

<p>Pharmaceuticals is such a heavily regulated industry. It’s not just about creatively doing the best analysis you can give. It’s doing the best analysis you can do within the constraints of the regulations. Some really clever Bayesian thing isn’t going to fly.</p>

<p>The thing that was a little bit unappealing about it was it can have a bit of a lawyerish flavor. Yes, you are trying to do the best analysis. But it’s not like your employers don’t care which way it comes out. It’s almost impossible not to look at it as finding the best statistical case.</p>

<p>The methodology requires that it be rigorous in some sense. But there’s always a funny space of choosing what analysis to do and convincing yourself what’s the best. </p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-with-that-experience-in-hand-were-you-motivated-to-transition-to-the-tech-industry-in-the-late-1990s-when-technology-was-becoming-big">So with that experience in hand, were you motivated to transition to the tech industry in the late 1990s when technology was becoming big?</h5>

<p>That’s exactly what happened. I switched from Schering-Plough in 2000, which is when the web had arrived and it was the first dot-com boom. I was living in New York City and had an opportunity to work at this dot-com start up in the city. I got on board with that and I started working for a company that was basically doing customer satisfaction surveys on the web. So I ended up having an analytical role. It was a startup that had been acquired by a larger company so it wasn’t exactly a startup. That’s how I got started in technology.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-data-questions-were-you-asking-at-these-web-companies-what-was-the-nature-of-the-analysis">What data questions were you asking at these web companies? What was the nature of the analysis?</h5>

<p>The idea was to do quick, popup customer satisfaction surveys that would be lightweight enough so that people were willing to fill them out, so you could get a decent response rate. That was the idea, rather than having an extensive survey where you would have to give people a lot of incentive to do it, and then have to deal with all the biases that you incur by doing that. The goal was, you have a website that wants to know how it’s doing and so it wants to ask its users some questions. This still exists today.</p>

<p>What was interesting was doing some analysis such as which features of a website are driving overall satisfaction on the website. That’s an example of a question. The design that they had was each customer had a large set of questions and then to make the survey short, they’d take a short sample of the questions. So you’d have a list of 50 questions, but you’d only ask each user 5 of them.</p>

<p>Then you have some data that’s massively missing, a survey that’s only one-tenth complete for each user. Then you want to do some analysis with that data, where every row is mostly missing.</p>

<p>So it’s a cool problem. There are also a few interesting methodological questions about the right way to do this sampling. One is how to make the popup *random, *whatever that means. There was a lot of writing SQL and trying to keep the lights on as well. It wasn’t a huge fraction of methodologically sexy work but it was fun.</p>

<p>It’s very hard to answer these questions, but the goal was to get answers to questions like, <em>“Which aspects of the site did customers get the most satisfaction from?”</em> So you’ve got a few problems here, one of which is that it’s all correlation. For instance, customer satisfaction appears to be highly correlated with appearance, but that’s because good-looking sites are also the most satisfying in other ways. So it’s not that if every crap site made itself look better then it would be more satisfying.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-did-any-of-your-experience-in-grad-school-carry-over-to-this-area-or-were-you-learning-on-the-fly">Did any of your experience in grad school carry over to this area? Or were you learning on the fly?</h5>

<p>Most of the time the advanced stuff I learned at school did not directly apply in any of my jobs because most of the math I learned at school was very specialized. But in the first couple of years you get some understanding of how things like regression work. Then when you come to a problem where you have missing data in every row you think, <em>“If I want to do linear regression that only depends on the first two moments of everything, I can estimate those fairly well. Because it’s balanced in a particular way. If I just fit the regression using the first two moments of everything that might actually work, and not be too biased… And well if the covariance matrix isn’t positive-definite then maybe I can fix that up.”</em></p>

<p>So there’s a little bit of basic math that you learn that gives you the foundations to feel comfortable when you hit something strange. In all these situations you’re always hitting problems that are slightly weird. In any real life work experience, you never hit anything that’s just a textbook problem. It always has some weird aspect. The more advanced your education and the more work experience you have, the more comfortable you are about hitting something weird and figuring out how to adapt what you know.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-did-metric-design-at-several-different-companies-including-google-based-on-the-different-things-youve-seen-how-do-you-approach-the-problem-of-metric-measuring-and-also-experimental-design-and-knowing-what-to-collect">You did metric design at several different companies including Google. Based on the different things you’ve seen, how do you approach the problem of metric measuring and also experimental design and knowing what to collect?</h5>

<p>That’s a pretty big question. Let’s take that one piece at a time. I’ll just make one point about experimental design which I think is a subtle point. Doing A/B testing is actually really hard to do well. One thing I learned at Google is you get huge value when you’re testing something if you can isolate the effect of your test as much as possible. So for example, if you’re making a change to Google’s ranking algorithm and you want to evaluate it, and that change only affects a small number of queries, you need to look at the queries that are going to be affected. You may not know which those are in advance, but you have to focus on those, otherwise you’re not going to be able to see anything small if you pull a random sample of queries.</p>

<p>That sounds obvious, but it’s not. Without being too specific, I’ll say that it has not always been done, that approach has not always been taken. But the whole notion of isolating the treatment effect – that has a lot of ramifications that get complicated.</p>

<p>For example, you think it’s straightforward. You just want to compare A with B. Treatment versus control, it’s very straightforward. Treatment on one side, control on the other and once you figure out your success metric and you measure both sides, you’re finished.</p>

<p>You can do that. But you might end up with a very noisy comparison if you do that – if the treatment is only targeted to a low number of samples. What you really want to do is compare those subjects that were exposed to the treatment, that were affected, to those in the control group who would have been affected by the treatment.</p>

<p>So this counterfactual comparison is what you are really interested in. Because it means that if you’re doing things the right way, you need to be logging on the control side whether each subject would have been exposed to the treatment. This means that you can’t just use your standard production, unless your standard production involves logging counterfactually what treatments would have accomplished.</p>

<p>It’s often not so obvious how to identify, in the control, whether they would have received the treatment. So I’ve seen that people usually ignore this. That’s what I would have done starting out, it’s only because I’ve worked through these problems at Google that I realized we’re not seeing anything because we’re comparing the whole treatment to the whole control. It’s just swamped in noise.</p>

<p>This has been a running theme for me, trying to hammer home this point. There are a lot of cases, even at Google (where experimentation is an extremely well-oiled machine), where this kind of thinking is not carried as far as it could be.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-you-balance-the-theoretical-rigor-you-were-coming-in-with-given-your-academic-training-with-the-practical-demands-of-actually-applying-statistics-in-an-industry-setting-were-there-tradeoffs-you-had-to-make">How did you balance the theoretical rigor you were coming in with, given your academic training, with the practical demands of actually applying statistics in an industry setting? Were there tradeoffs you had to make?</h5>

<p>That’s definitely a constant challenge. </p>

<p>There’s a more basic thing, especially where there’s a division between engineering and analysis – then who decides what gets logged? From what I say it’s clear it matters a lot what’s logged. You may need to log a lot of things to do it correctly and it might not be obvious that the company needs to log it.</p>

<p>Thus, even if you want to do the basics, you ask engineering to do some work that’s not very interesting and a pain. There’s a reaction of, <em>“Really? I have to log that? Explain to me why I need to do this.”</em></p>

<p>The more nuanced the reason, the harder it is to do. It’s hard to demonstrate the value of it until it’s already in place and then you can say, <em>“Look at this analysis that we were able to do.”</em> It’s 100x more informative than it would have been if you hadn’t done this extra logging. So yes, it’s a challenge.</p>

<p>The close and better-aligned engineering and analysis is, the less friction you get.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-seems-that-analysis-spans-many-different-domains-of-the-company-not-only-do-you-have-to-work-with-engineering-but-also-once-you-update-your-analysis-then-you-need-to-show-it-to-someone-who-will-act-on-it">It seems that analysis spans many different domains of the company. Not only do you have to work with engineering, but also once you update your analysis then you need to show it to someone who will act on it.</h5>

<p>I do think the communication needs of the data scientist role is one of the most important things. When I’m hiring, there are always some trade-offs between different skills, but the ability to communicate well is a given. Because it’s important in so many ways, both in negotiations with other teams and making your analysis have an impact on the organization. You have to be able to talk to people and explain why it matters.</p>

<p>There are people who are good at analysis and people who are good at writing code. For some of these people, there’s such a strong temptation to present things as, <em>“I did this, and then I did this, and then I did this. And then I did this really smart thing and here are the results after I did all these really smart things.”</em></p>

<p>No one gives a shit about that. No one really cares how smart you are. This is why it’s different from graduate school. The subtext of <em>“I’m smart”</em> doesn’t matter anywhere outside of graduate school. You have to start with: <em>Here’s what I found and why you should care about it.</em></p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-seeing-as-youve-worked-intensely-with-understanding-metrics-at-numerous-companies-over-the-past-few-years-what-have-been-some-of-your-important-takeaways">Seeing as you’ve worked intensely with understanding metrics at numerous companies over the past few years, what have been some of your important takeaways?</h5>

<p>I have two main things to say about metrics.</p>

<p>First, there are two very different angles of looking at metrics. There’s the overall evaluation criterion idea, where you think of a metric that everybody agrees represents progress. Then you focus all your efforts on improving that metric with the understanding that this is our understanding of when progress is made.</p>

<p>So when I worked at Microsoft, this philosophy was very strongly advocated. “This is our overall evaluation criterion, you have to move this. I’m sorry but if you can’t move this then it isn’t worth shipping. Too bad.”</p>

<p>My philosophy of metrics is almost the opposite of this. I think overall the evaluation criterion is good – you want something you can track. You want to have a number you can believe in that represents the overall health of your product. But generally, anything that’s accepted as the driving metric in this philosophy is going to be too broad and you’re not going to be able to move it. So you really have to make a conceptual distinction in my opinion between approximate metrics –that you use to decide whether a feature is good, and which are going to be very fine-grained and specific to your feature – and these overall global metrics that you hope go up.</p>

<p>It depends a little bit if you’re in a business that depends on small improvements or whether you’re at a stage where you’re making many big improvements. For example, in Google search many of the improvements were small. If you’re improving the ranking, it’s small. If you restrict yourself to these broad metrics you can never ship anything because they don’t register on the global metrics.</p>

<p>One example of a broad metric is searches per unique user. Using that you can do something to ranking and your search engine gets better so people might use it more. But that’s really hard; you’re not going to be able to see that in most experiments.</p>

<p>So I am very big on thinking very hard about what a particular feature is trying to accomplish, and how we can measure that as narrowly as possible. It’s good to have a small number of metrics, but for shipping you want something that measures as closely as possible the positive impact you expect that feature to have, and not think of it as an overall evaluation criterion. So my philosophy is the opposite of what I saw at Microsoft.</p>

<p>The second thing about metrics is that you don’t have metrics on the metrics. You never really know what a good metric is. So you spend a lot of intellectual cycles trying to develop things that are useful. And these things are being used as a yardstick for other things. So you never have clear guidance about whether your metrics themselves are any good.</p>

<p>It comes back to getting a new metric established. How do you do that? You have to lawyer it again. That’s tough. How do you do that? How do you go about convincing yourself that a metric is good? And how do you go about selling it or convincing other people that it’s good?</p>

<p>It’s really hard. A lot of the time, at least in the domains I’ve worked in, you’re interested in “is a particular feature good?” Or, “Is a particular change to a website good?” You don’t have access to seeing the electrodes in users’ brains to know if it’s good or not, so you end up inferring what’s a positive impact from behavioral data. While there are all sorts of things you can do to try and quantify user behavior, the issue is that you never really have absolute truth about what’s good.</p>

<p>So one possibility is to try a lot of things that seem plausible. You don’t have absolute truth but you have correlation: lots of plausible approaches that seem to point in the same direction.</p>

<p>It’s not logically guaranteed, but if you start with some plausible things, a lot of them move together. Some seem much cleaner than the others. That’s how you proceed. It could be something else that’s making all these things move together, but it’s also plausible that there’s underlying goodness that’s driving them all. So I start to believe that.</p>

<p>The other way, that’s somewhat of an empirical approach. You observe different possible things and the fact that they’ve all moved together gives you some interactive evidence that they’re all doing something reasonable.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-this-is-a-really-good-point-could-tell-a-brief-story-about-one-of-these-instances-i-understand-the-lesson-in-the-general-case-but-what-was-one-thing-that-you-tried-to-measure-that-was-hard-to-get-at-and-what-were-some-things-that-you-designed-to-tackle-this-problem">This is a really good point. Could tell a brief story about one of these instances? I understand the lesson in the general case, but, what was one thing that you tried to measure that was hard to get at, and what were some things that you designed to tackle this problem?</h5>

<p>I’m going to go back to the example of search. </p>

<p>Let’s say you want to use clicks on a search as a measure of accuracy of search results. Well, a lot of that is based on a “more-clicks-is-better” principle – you start thinking about when more clicks are better. If I have a query, “What is the capital of Albania” and I have a lot of clicks on that query, is that a good thing? Probably not. But if I have a query such as “Best digital camera” and I have a lot of clicks for that kind of query, that probably is a good thing.</p>

<p>First you take a proposal for a metric. Even without looking at any data, you start thinking about under what circumstances the metric could point the opposite way that it’s supposed to. Then you get some ideas; you see there are some major cases where the metric points the wrong way. Maybe we need some segmentation. Maybe there is no simple metric that is going to cover everything; maybe we have to consider navigational queries and more browsing queries separately to have any behavioral metric that makes sense.</p>

<p>You can convince yourself by introspection. The story also becomes more convincing when you observe how this new segmented metric compares in practice to just counting clicks. Neither of those things is entirely satisfying. Because your empirical stuff isn’t conclusive, your empirical evidence is never conclusive. Your thought experiments are just thought experiments. So it’s not math. It’s not science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-this-sounds-like-a-deep-distinction-between-academia-and-industry-how-has-industry-changed-your-view-of-math">This sounds like a deep distinction between academia and industry. How has industry changed your view of math?</h5>

<p>I still like doing math puzzles for fun. I still think math is beautiful. But in terms of when I think about math as something on the job for me, I don’t consider myself any kind of mathematician. It’s just there, it’s a tool.</p>

<p>I’ll say something a little broader than that: math is just there as something that will help me figure out my problem. I feel the same way about all the machinery of data science.</p>

<p>For me it’s the actual substantive questions. For me, there’s data, there are interesting questions. I want to answer the questions. There are interesting products you can make that require the data to be big and that’s cool. But the big data <em>per se</em> isn’t interesting. Maybe I’ve been spoiled a little bit at Google where you have this massive infrastructure and you don’t need to think about it that much. You just write a script and send it off and Google’s massive infrastructure processes it, and you get your answer back.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-lets-talk-about-your-view-on-data-science--how-do-you-see-the-term-and-the-division-within-the-roles-in-the-field">Let’s talk about your view on data science.  How do you see the term, and the division within the roles in the field?</h5>

<p>It’s a good question. I think I will probably say something similar to what Pete Skomoroch says, although I’m pretty much all the way type A. For me, a type A data scientist is about Analysis. B is for Building. Of course there’s no dividing line between those things. A lot of people do some of both.</p>

<p>At LinkedIn, it’s divided up that way. There’s a team called Decision Sciences. They are focused more, but not exclusively, on analysis, working with product teams, experimentation, some model building. But for the most part it’s far from putting stuff into production.</p>

<p>And then there’s the data products team which uses data science techniques to build things. So I think that’s a reasonable distinction to make.</p>

<p>So why even have this term “data science”? What’s new here? Why don’t we just call type the A data science a “Statistician” and type B something else? Well, I do think there’s a little bit more to say than just that. </p>

<p>There’s a lot of practical work with data that is not covered, and it’s totally different from the statistics curriculum. I’m talking about all the practicalities of data, all the visualization, the critical aspect of it and the communication piece that we talked about earlier.</p>

<p>Statistics as a field has focused itself very narrowly as a field on producing certain artifacts: confidence intervals, hypothesis tests, p-values etc. These are the work products of the statistician. In the pharmaceutical industry, that’s what it is. You have a report but at the end of the day you’re saying, “Here’s my p-value and it’s less than .05.”</p>

<p>However, for data science, there is so much more to it than that. Although I have to admit the term “data scientist” took me a while to get used to. I was a late adopter. I laughed when my friend sent me this meme that said: “*Data scientist, is that like a hammer carpenter?” *I thought that was funny. But I accept it now as a term that encompasses much more than statistics.</p>

<p>I think that the type B data scientist – the data engineer – I think that’s a reasonable distinction to make. It really amounts to: these people all have some mix of statistics and analysis skills and coding. And then you can make a continuum or you can say you’re mostly stats or you’re mostly engineering. Josh Wills defines a data scientist as someone who’s a better coder than every statistician and a better statistician than every coder.</p>

<p>To me there’s probably no-one in that category. At Google, the really strong coders who know a lot of statistics are software engineers. They don’t have a special title. They’re just software engineers who know a lot about machine learning. They might call themselves a data scientist to get a job. I can see that point of view.</p>

<p>Sometimes you get people who are quite good coders, but they’re not all the way to being a software engineer. But they know a lot of machine learning. So they can implement prototypes, but not all the way to production. That I think becomes a tricky place for data scientists because you’re in between things. But I still consider it to be a useful designation.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-with-that-designation-in-mind-when-you-are-trying-to-hire-people-who-are-coming-out-of-school-right-now-what-are-the-features-youre-looking-for-and-then-more-generally-how-do-you-think-when-youre-building-a-data-science-team-what-goes-into-that-composition">With that designation in mind, when you are trying to hire people who are coming out of school right now, what are the features you’re looking for? And then more generally, how do you think when you’re building a data science team? What goes into that composition?</h5>

<p>I’m not sure I can answer the second question that well, since it depends on what you’re trying to do. At LinkedIn, I’m not exactly the person who built the team. I came into a team that was already there. When I think about hiring, I want people who can code somewhat, although I myself am not a particularly good coder. But we’re more focused on analysis. So when I’m looking for people, the most important qualities that a data scientist should have include having a feeling of how to take a data set and answer a question with it. Figuring out what should I compare? What’s the control? What’s the way of transforming the things that I have available to me to make it reasonable? What am I missing here that I need to go and collect?</p>

<p>This isn’t stuff you learn in school. Some people have it; it comes from experience too. It definitely comes from working with data. So I look for people who have real experience with data – whether it’s in a hard science, a social science, computer science, or statistics. Just understanding theory isn’t enough. You need data sense.</p>

<p>I’m also really looking for the ability to communicate well about things you’ve done, and good judgment. Understanding that when you’re working through a problem you have a series of choices to make and being very aware of the choices you’re making and why you’re making them at every stage. That’s part of data sense too. So these are somewhat intangible factors.</p>

<p>I also look for some facility with coding – you need to be able to get your data and manipulate it. Therefore coding is required. I myself don’t look for super-heavy coding skills because I feel like a lot things in my world have to be picked up. Also, I can’t evaluate it myself when I talk to people.</p>

<p>Then, the more formal statistical inference is the last thing that I look for. Not that it’s unimportant, but it is probably last.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-from-what-youve-said-it-seems-that-whats-most-important-is-to-have-real-life-experience-working-with-data">From what you’ve said, it seems that what’s most important is to have real life experience working with data.</h5>

<p>Not everyone who has worked with data gets the data sense that I’m trying to pick out. But working with real data seems to help with that. It’s one of the factors.</p>

<p>I spent so many years at Google inventing and asking people math brainteaser questions, which is basically a <em>“How smart are you?” *type of gauge. I’ve totally given up on that stuff, because although it measures something – people who can do all those things, they tend to be smart people – there’s a *job opening</em> that I have and I don’t think an ability to answer these questions is that strongly correlated with being able to do the job well.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
