<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Jonathan Goldman</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-jonathan-goldman">Jonathan Goldman</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-director-of-data-science-and-analytics-at-intuit">Director of Data Science and Analytics at Intuit</h5>

<p>*How to Build Novel Data Products and Companies *</p>

<p>*Jonathan is currently Director of Data Science and Analytics at Intuit. He co-founded Level Up Analytics, a premier data science consulting company focused on data science, big data and analytics which Intuit acquired in 2013. From 2006–09 he led the product analytics team at LinkedIn which was responsible for creating new data-driven products. While at LinkedIn he invented the “People You May Know” product and algorithm which was directly responsible for getting millions of users connected and more engaged with LinkedIn. *</p>

<p>
  <em>He received a Ph.D. in physics in 2005 from Stanford where he worked on quantum computing and a B.S. in physics from MIT.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-give-us-a-sense-of-the-background-and-the-path-that-youve-taken-to-get-where-you-are-today">Can you give us a sense of the background and the path that you’ve taken to get where you are today?</h5>

<p>I completed my Bachelors in Physics at MIT. I just absolutely love math and physics. I actually loved a lot of other fields as well, but knew I wanted to stay with math and physics in particular. I also absolutely loved MIT – it was the perfect place for me. When it came to graduation, however, I still didn’t know what I wanted to do with my future. I knew I wanted to do something more in science, but I didn’t know if I definitely wanted to be a professor. I ended up applying to Ph.D. programs but still wasn’t certain if that was what I wanted to do.</p>

<p>I also applied for a few jobs, but was just not excited about any of the jobs I saw, and how they would leverage my skills. In comparison, grad school was exciting since I would get to work on fundamental research there. At the time, I was really excited about what was happening in the world of quantum computing.</p>

<p>I got into Stanford, and I found an advisor who was specifically working on quantum computing. So I came out to Stanford and liked it for a while, but towards the later part of my Ph.D. recognized I wanted to something else. Research was hard and not as rewarding in the short-term – it took me seven years to get the results that I needed to graduate. It was in my fifth or sixth year that I thought, <em>“I want to do something that has a little bit more immediate impact.”</em></p>

<p>The parts of the Ph.D. program I loved most were when I was actually getting the data, analyzing it, and iterating very fast. I had these experiments I’d have to run for 30 hours, and basically after that, the system would shut down, restart my experiment, and it would take a day or two to get the system to reset. It was during this period that I was getting this amazing data, make a hypothesis then and test it. I loved the actual thinking, the theoretical aspects of it, what that told me to do with the experiment, and what parameters to explore.</p>

<p>Towards the end of my program, I got involved in some entrepreneurship activities at Stanford. I got involved in this organization called a nanotechnology forum, where Steve Chu, Stanford physics professor and later the Secretary of Energy came to speak. A lot was happening back in the early 2000s in that area. I was trying to go into that area, looking at solar energy technologies – I was very excited about that. But then I looked at a few of the solar technology companies, and the basic approach that they had was, *“Hey, you get to work on this technology as a postdoc, and if it works, you’ll get a full-time job. If not, that’s a nice postdoc for a year or two.” *That just didn’t seem appealing to me.</p>

<p>At the end of graduate school, I was looking for a job, and I knew at that point I just did not want to stay and do a postdoc. I ended up going to the consulting firm Accenture, and I was excited about going to work in energy. I had been working on energy-related stuff, and I was getting more excited and interested in that. I wanted to work in strategy for Accenture – the focus was in the utility/energy sector, especially in the natural gas market.</p>

<p>So, I was working for a little while on natural gas strategy for one of the partners, and that was fun. I got put on a project to work at a utility company, and it was good to get that exposure – to find out what the corporate world is like. What is it like to do consulting? What’s it like to work in this company? How do they operate? I actually learned a lot about how to communicate and how they work; it’s such a different world from academia.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-tell-us-a-bit-more-about-what-you-did-at-accenture-what-were-you-involved-in-there">Can you tell us a bit more about what you did at Accenture? What were you involved in there?</h5>

<p>I was in the supply chain project for a utility company, and we did a lot of work on supply and demand, and other sorts of optimizations. When should the utility company buy? How much inventory should they have and what do they have to plan for? They’re interesting problems because you need math and analytics to figure out the optimizations. In the case of a utility company, it’s different because you have to plan for worst-case scenarios. If there’s a storm, I need to be able to repair everything quickly enough so people have enough power. There’s demand and supply planning, as well as strategic sourcing – there’s a whole bunch of interesting problems.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-tell-us-more-about-your-transition-from-accenture-to-linkedin">Can you tell us more about your transition from Accenture to LinkedIn?</h5>

<p>At that point where I was thinking, <em>“Let me see if I can do something a little more technical.” *I felt like I learned what I needed to learn so I was trying to find new projects. I started looking around to new places, including LinkedIn. Initially it seemed like it was a recruiting platform and I wasn’t that excited about it, but after I went and met with various people there, learned about their data, and learned about what they were thinking about, I thought *“Wow, this is awesome.”</em></p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-it-about-linkedin-that-hooked-you">What was it about LinkedIn that hooked you?</h5>

<p>Well, what really excited me was thinking, <em>“Well, look, you have this data about people’s careers, where they went to school, where they are now working, what they have done in their careers, and descriptions of their past jobs. So how do I help people get the right job?”</em> It’s a problem that actually felt very personal. While I’m trying to find the right career for me, I could help work on solving that problem for others at scale.  </p>

<p>The data was all there, and I could ask questions about the data very quickly. It was exactly the part of the Ph.D. program that I liked. Suddenly I didn’t have to deal with the experimental apparatus which took me two years to build. It was like, boom, I have the data, and it’s actually very interesting. I was learning all these new techniques and it was great.</p>

<p>Within two weeks of starting, I had already felt that this was my dream job. It was awesome, and I totally loved it. I found people even more collaborative in companies than they were in university research – we were all working to help the company do well and make a dent in the universe. In academia you also try to make a dent, but it was very often your own dent. Academia becomes a very competitive world since you have to make a name for yourself to succeed. The business world is also competitive, but in my experience, teamwork is more highly valued there because it really does take a significant effort from many people to make something interesting happen.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-sounds-like-you-really-enjoyed-your-time-at-linkedin-what-did-you-do-there">It sounds like you really enjoyed your time at LinkedIn. What did you do there?</h5>

<p>I was trying to figure out what I could do with the data to improve things. One project I worked on involved sending invites on LinkedIn. I looked at questions such as whether or not the click-through-rates changed depending on the level of the person who sent it to you (more senior than you, more junior to you, a peer). Something else I thought of and looked at was the reminder emails that we send a week or two later after you haven’t accepted an invite. I looked into the best time to send such a reminder, and discovered neat facts such as 80% of invites go to people in the same time zone. This means that even though I don’t know what time zone you’re in, I can guess pretty well from the time-zone of the person who sent you the invite. We optimized the time of day that the email went out and saw boosts of 2-3% in click-through rate. This improvement compounds and the result can be massive.</p>

<p>Basically, we were trying to look for all these little knobs to turn to understand the LinkedIn dynamic and to understand LinkedIn at a fundamental, physical level. I thought of it as a physics problem involving people and invites. I was asking myself – who’s connected to whom, and how can I get more people to join? How can I get more people connected? When you understand the system, you try to think of it not just as these disparate things but more as an overall global pattern that you want to understand – an engine that you want to get to move faster.</p>

<p>I started thinking about some of the dynamics involved in what gets people to sign up, and then I also started looking at the data. I found that a lot of people didn’t even have that many connections. And people were not going to really get the value of LinkedIn until they had a good network – until they had ten, twenty or thirty connections. Most people only had one, two, even zero. I observed these things in the data, and realized that we really need to just work on getting people connected. I asked myself – how can we get more people connected? Well, we can make it easier for you to find people to connect with. Back then, there was Friendster, MySpace, and the beginnings of Facebook, and no one had been working on recommending people you might know.</p>

<p>Steve Stegman (Steve was what we would call a data scientist today) and I, within the span of one day, conceived the beginnings of the* “Viewers of this profile also viewed…”* feature. We could quickly get stuff out onto the site, test it, and see the click-through rates, so that was awesome. I had this idea of trying to recommend people you know and we ultimately called it “People You May Know”. I was working on the heuristics, mostly at night, just iterating and iterating, and asking, <em>“What are the things that can work?”</em> And we ended up using a lot of stuff like company and school, and also the graph structure of how connected they are. The initial click-through rates were amazing – and then machine learning helped increase click-through rates another 2- to 3-fold. This work was spearheaded by Monica Rogati who I hired onto my team.</p>

<p>This was not a product that was on any roadmap – I think that’s an important thing to point out. I pitched “People You May Know” to a few product managers and they were all lukewarm about the idea. It was hard finding people who really bought into the idea at the beginning, but we ran tests and had data we could go back to and show people. Once we had data, no-one stopped us from expanding and doing more but it still took some time to get the proper engineering investment we needed. Because of the viral nature of “People You May Know”, we demonstrated with data that this feature got millions of users back to the site who otherwise would not have visited the site. We showed this to Jeff Weiner in 2009, and he was like, <em>“Yes, we’ve got to go on and do more.”</em> At that point there was lots more engineering investment put in place across LinkedIn and fortunately PYMK got significant additional investment.</p>

<p>This was a great example of a data product that was never actually on the product roadmap. It’s the impact that a data scientist can have on a business, because you can observe some pattern in the data, build something, and start doing some pretty sophisticated stuff with all these different signals. You end up transforming the trajectory of growth.</p>

<p>“People You May Know” started as my original work. I did basically all of it initially, including the algorithm and the product, but ultimately, as it grew and grew, many more people became involved. Monica and Steve Stegman made contributions to some of the algorithm, and DJ helped with getting it onto mobile and getting it faster. Other product managers, like Janet, were also involved.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-later-on-in-your-career-you-started-your-own-company-with-your-wife-and-a-third-co-founder-lucian-lita----can-you-tell-us-more-about-this-what-was-it-like-transitioning-from-a-role-as-a-data-scientist-at-a-large-company-to-running-your-own">Later on in your career, you started your own company with your wife and a third co-founder, Lucian Lita – can you tell us more about this? What was it like transitioning from a role as a data scientist at a large company to running your own?</h5>

<p>The three of us saw this opportunity – the demand for data science and building technology that would help solve data science problems. We saw a huge need that was just constant, and thought we could build a premier consulting firm and we would go to these companies and help them transform their businesses, while hiring people that we really liked working with.</p>

<p>The amazing thing was that we were able to get really good talent, get really good clients, and work on really challenging problems. There weren’t that many people doing exactly what we were doing – no-one else did the full end-to-end, including “What’s the business problem you’re facing? Where’s the place we can have the most impact? What technology might need to be built or deployed? What algorithms and analysis need to be done? We could do the full stack – I think a lot of companies really liked that approach.  </p>

<p>One of our clients, Intuit, after we got to know them and they got to know us, approached us about getting our entire company focused on Intuit – namely they wanted to acquire us. We really liked the problem they were working on. They were fundamentally changing people’s lives by making it easier to manage their finances, do their taxes and run a small business. It’s actually quite an interesting problem because they see so much of the economy. They are really truly one of the few companies that I think is mapping the world’s economy. You could say that LinkedIn is mapping the talent economy, but Intuit is actually mapping the real transactions that are happening. I don’t know any other company that has such interesting data. The impact on the economy and economic wealth is profound.  To me, it was a good mission to be a part of, and I really liked the culture and the people.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-given-your-own-experiences-in-a-phd-program-what-advice-do-you-have-for-our-readers-who-are-in-a-phd-or-just-recently-finished-one-and-are-looking-to-start-their-career-in-data-science">Given your own experiences in a PhD program, what advice do you have for our readers who are in a PhD, or just recently finished one, and are looking to start their career in data science?</h5>

<p>Find the companies that are aligned with your values, where you get to work on things that are impactful and making a dent in the universe. There’s never going to be a shortage of interesting problems to work on that are massive and impactful. When you’re at that kind of company, it’s easier to take that data and turn the data into transformational business impact.  </p>

<p>I think one of the most important things is to learn to be curious. You see something that might spark new questions for future projects. Once you’re curious about something with the data, you’ll figure out how to go solve and answer those questions, regardless of the technique. You need to be able to go back and forth in an iterative manner as businesses don’t always have well-defined problems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
