<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>William Chen</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-william-chen">William Chen</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-data-scientist-at-quora">Data Scientist at Quora</h5>

<p>
  <em>From Undergraduate to Data Scientist</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>William Chen is a data scientist at Quora, where he helps grow and share the world’s knowledge. He became a data scientist after finishing his joint degree in Statistics and Applied Math at Harvard, and is part of the first wave of college undergraduates who took data science courses and sought data science jobs straight after graduation. Prior to joining Quora full time, he interned at Quora and Etsy as data interns. He has a passion for telling stories with data, and shares his knowledge extensively on <a href="http://www.quora.com/William-Chen-6">Quora</a>.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>William is one of the co-authors of this book.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-tell-us-about-your-journey-transitioning-into-data-science">Can you tell us about your journey transitioning into data science?</h5>

<p>I started my freshman year at Harvard wanting to study math, but then took Stat 110 with Joe Blitzstein. The class changed the way I thought about uncertainty and everyday events, while teaching me how to value intuition and communication. The class influenced me to declare statistics as my major in my sophomore year.</p>

<p>In my sophomore year, I started looking around for internships that would use some of my probability and statistics background. My knowledge was mostly theoretical then with little experience in application, so I was pleasantly surprised when Etsy invited me to intern with them as a data analyst. This was my introduction to using data to improve business – every facet of my internship helped me grow and develop my skills as a budding data scientist.</p>

<p>Etsy is a very metrics-driven company and I was able to see and understand the heart of how Etsy makes decisions with A/B testing. The frequent statistics discussions on the mailing list were engaging and I was able to learn about common techniques and potential pitfalls in metrics-driven tech companies.</p>

<p>The presentation of data at Etsy was beautiful (with d3 dashboards and highly polished slide decks). In that kind of environment and attention to visuals, I taught myself ggplot2 and started making my own plots and graphics. I was able to learn a lot during that internship – it was the start of my career in data science.</p>

<p>After my internship at Etsy ended, I started my junior year. That year, I returned to being a teaching fellow (the equivalent of an undergraduate teaching assistant) for Stat 110. In helping people with their probability problems, I realized that teaching probability helped me improve both my communication and storytelling capabilities. It was also very enjoyable and I got more in the habit of trying to share and teach whatever I could.</p>

<p>My junior year, I also started to take a lot more CS classes as I realized their importance in a data science role. Not having enough programming background to implement your statistics knowledge can severely limit the number of things you can do. I realized that having both was imperative to succeeding in a data science career, so I worked to excel at their intersection by taking classes that I felt would augment my skills.</p>

<p>I was also applying for internships my junior year, with the mindset that I wanted to use my statistical and programming skills to help companies make better decisions. I received an internship offer from Quora and decided to take it, even though I was still fairly new to the product at the time.</p>

<p>At Quora, I touched a lot more of the codebase and learned much more about software engineering. There was a sense of dynamism and importance to my project. It involved new growth initiatives, and I appreciated the level of freedom and trust that Quora gave me. I enjoyed my time there working with both the people and the product a lot, so I decided to go back full-time.</p>

<p>In my senior year, I continued developing my statistical and programming toolkit while working on my thesis.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-why-did-you-choose-to-major-in-statistics-instead-of-computer-science">Why did you choose to major in statistics instead of computer science?</h5>

<p>I put a lot of time into Stat 110 and a whole bunch of other statistics classes - I enjoyed those classes so much that it would have been unreasonable for me to major in anything else!</p>

<p>During my internship at Etsy, I saw first-hand how limited my abilities would be if I could only do statistics and not code.I put a lot of effort that summer into developing my abilities to analyze data in R.</p>

<p>My junior and senior years I took an equal load of statistics and computer science courses. I took computer science courses so I could more effectively do statistics. I took classes to make me better at applying statistics (Machine Learning, Parallel Programming, Web Development, Data Science) or just because they were fun mathematical topics (Data Structures and Algorithms, Economics and Computer Science).</p>

<p>My primary interest is still statistics, but I heavily value computer science since it empowers me to do more complicated analyses, generate visualizations, deal with massive amounts of data, and automate away a lot of my work so I can focus on what’s really interesting.</p>

<p>That being said, I actually declared a secondary (aka minor) in Computer Science my Senior Spring. I fulfilled its requirements (accidentally) and pursued the secondary because it would require no extra effort on my part, just some paperwork.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-tell-us-more-about-what-you-felt-that-your-main-challenge-was-during-your-data-internships">Can you tell us more about what you felt that your main challenge was during your data internships?</h5>

<p>One exciting thing about working for a tech company where data is central is that there’s so many potential projects to tackle. There’s so much data that can be analyzed and never enough data scientists to really look deeply into every single thing. My main challenge during my internships, especially at Quora, was figuring out how to prioritize all the possible things I could be doing, especially since I took on many projects in parallel.</p>

<p>At Quora, I realized I couldn’t replicate what I did at school by working on everything at the same time. I realized that I needed to prioritize things that would have the most impact for the company. I spent a bit too much time working on certain tools and not enough time focusing on researching growth initiatives that would have potentially higher impact.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-see-data-science-in-terms-of-it-being-the-intersection-of-math-statistics-and-computer-science-what-weight-would-you-give-each-in-terms-of-importance">How do you see data science in terms of it being the intersection of math, statistics and computer science? What weight would you give each in terms of importance?</h5>

<p>I would say that the programming and software engineering part is very important because you may be expected to implement models, write dashboards, and pull out data in creative ways. You’ll be the one in charge of hauling your own data. You’ll be the one who owns the end-to-end and the full execution, from pulling out the data to presenting it to the company.</p>

<p>The Pareto principle is in full effect here. Eighty percent of the time is spent pulling the data, cleaning the data, and writing the code for your analysis. I found this true during my internships (especially because I was new to everything). A good coding background is particularly important here, and can save you a lot of time and frustration.</p>

<p>To emphasize: pulling the data and figuring out what to do with it takes an enormous amount of time, and often doesn’t require any statistics knowledge. A lot of this is software engineering and writing efficient queries or efficient ways to move around and analyze your data. Programming is important here.</p>

<p>One interesting thing to note is that the statistics used day-to-day in data science is really different than the kind of statistics you’d read about in a recent research paper. There’s a bias towards methods that are fast, interpretable, and reliable instead of theoretically perfect.</p>

<p>While the statistics and math may not be that complicated, a strong background in math and statistics is still important to gather the intuition you need to distinguish real insights from fake insights. Also, a strong background and experience will give you better intuition on how to solve some of your company’s harder problems. You may have a better intuition on why a certain metric might be falling or why people are suddenly more engaged in your product.</p>

<p>Another benefit of a strong statistics and math background is the contribution to communication. The better you understand the theoretical bases around a certain idea or concept, the better you can articulate what you’re doing and communicate it with the rest of your team. As a data scientist, a large portion of your work is presenting an action that you feel would have an impact. Communication is very important to make that happen.  </p>

<p>Some data science roles require a very strong statistical or machine learning background. You might be working on a feed or recommendation engine. Or dealing with problems where you need to know time series analysis, basic machine learning techniques, linear regressions, and causal inference. There are lots of kinds of data for which you’d need a more advanced statistics background to be able to analyze.</p>

<p>Figuring out the balance between computer science, statistics and math will really depend on the role you take, so these are just some of my general observations.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-why-do-you-think-so-many-people-entering-data-science-have-phds">Why do you think so many people entering data science have Ph.D.s?</h5>

<p>Data science is a new field now, and employers are looking for people with the qualifications to become a data scientist. Because it’s such a new field, not that many people have much industry experience in this, so you have to find people who show some other signal that they’d be qualified for the position. Having a Ph.D. in a computational/quantitative background is a great choice usually, since they’ve already done plenty of research and data work. Ph.D. and Master’s students with data experience often have qualities that are great for data science: learning quickly, asking questions, and being resilient.</p>

<p>I think companies will start hiring more and more undergrads to fill data science roles in 5-10 years as there will be more people coming out with the right data science background. There are a ton more Sophomores at Harvard, for instance who want to become data scientists, then there were when I was a Sophomore. I think they view it as a promising and exciting career opportunity, of which I wholly agree.</p>

<p>Right now, there are plenty of MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) offering classes and certificates, and universities all over the world are offering their first data science class. For example, Harvard’s first data science class and first predictive modeling class showed up in the 2013-2014 school year. These classes are perfect for undergrads who want to work on data.</p>

<p>If you’re trying to hire data scientists and there are very few people with experience, those with Phds and Master’s are good candidates. That will probably change in 5 to 10 years as there will be more undergraduates who come out with the right data science background.  </p>

<p>Right now on Coursera, there’s already a data science specialization, and at Harvard there’s a new class called Data Science taught by Joe Blitzstein and Hanspeter Pfister. Joe is the same professor who taught the statistics class I loved.</p>

<p>In Spring 2014, a predictive modeling class started at Harvard. This is a class that focuses on Kaggle competitions. This kind of class is perfect for undergrads who want to work with data.  </p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-if-you-had-to-go-back-to-when-you-were-just-starting-out-what-would-you-have-focused-on-more-and-what-would-you-have-focused-on-less">If you had to go back to when you were just starting out, what would you have focused on more, and what would you have focused on less?</h5>

<p>I think my big regret in course selection in college was not taking programming classes my freshman year. Programming is so vital in data science – there’s not that many roles for pure statisticians who don’t code unless it’s a giant company like Google or Amazon that might be specialized enough to need research statisticians. Programming is so essential that you can’t get away with not doing it well.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-when-it-comes-to-this-term-data-science-a-lot-of-people-are-worried-or-claim-theres-a-lot-of-hype-around-the-field-in-that-its-overblown-whats-your-take-around-this-hype-and-craze-around-big-data-and-data-science">When it comes to this term “data science”, a lot of people are worried or claim there’s a lot of hype around the field in that it’s overblown. What’s your take around this hype and craze around big data and data science?</h5>

<p>It’s definitely a bit overhyped right now, just like cloud computing and the mobile / local / social craze. However, just because it’s overhyped doesn’t mean it’s not important. I think over the next few years, the hype will die down but the importance of data science will not.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-do-you-think-that-the-need-for-data-scientists-will-die-down-as-tools-get-better">Do you think that the need for data scientists will die down as tools get better?</h5>

<p>Personally, I appreciate the new tools a lot. I think the job of the data scientist will change a lot over the next few years as the tool kit gets better.</p>

<p>However, I don’t think the need for data scientists will decrease because we’re always going to need people who can interpret results and distill insights into actionable plans to improve business. Data science is never going to run out of hard problems – there will always be the need for people to interpret results and communicate ideas. That’s what I think data science is – it’s distilling the data into actionable insights to improve product and business.</p>

<p>Tools will make what some data scientists do outdated, as some startups provide enterprise solutions and commoditize certain tasks. Even with the new enterprise tools, there will be a need for data scientists to be able to use the tools intelligently. You’re going to want your data scientists to look at the results and think about how they can help the company directly.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-much-domain-expertise-do-you-need-in-order-to-be-a-good-data-scientist-how-much-do-you-need-to-know-about-peoples-behaviors-online-and-does-that-drive-the-products-to-be-built">How much domain expertise do you need in order to be a good data scientist? How much do you need to know about people’s behaviors online, and does that drive the products to be built?</h5>

<p>At Quora, I worked on a project that involved understanding user engagement. I was in a unique position while trying to understand that problem since I was an avid user of Quora myself. When you have domain knowledge, you have an advantage in that you can make better hypotheses on what you’re curious about before you even look at the data. You can then look at the data to gain a better intuition on why you were right or wrong. Domain expertise and the intuition that comes coupled with that can help a lot, especially if your models are complicated or you need to present them to an internal audience. The domain expertise facilitates the sharing of insightful stories that help explain the drivers of human behavior in your product. This is really different than some data sets on Kaggle where you aren’t even given the column names (because of privacy) and don’t really understand the data you’re working with.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-were-choosing-between-quantitative-finance-and-data-science-and-eventually-chose-data-science-why-did-that-happen-and-what-were-the-considerations-when-you-were-making-that-decision">You were choosing between quantitative finance and data science and eventually chose data science. Why did that happen, and what were the considerations when you were making that decision?</h5>

<p>I think quantitative finance and data science are both really good options. I’m pretty sure that data science was the right option for me because I am just so excited to see how technology can change the way the world works and make everything work better. I felt like I wanted to be a part of that. I decided that in order for me to do this properly, I needed to be part of a consumer or enterprise technology firm where I was able to help make a product that empowered people to do things.</p>

<p>I also really like the teaching and communication aspects of data science – I found out that I enjoyed it when I got to help teach Statistics 110 at Harvard. Data Science has a lot more of this teaching and communication going on - often in quantitative finance all you need are your back-testing results.</p>

<p>I want to be some sort of evangelist for data, and convince people that data is useful. I feel that there’s a lot more potential to do this in the tech sector. For tech, data is very new, while for finance, data is very old. I just found it exciting to be part of something where data was just getting a foothold. I wanted to be a part of something where technology is used to empower people and make the world better.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
