<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Bradley Voytek</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-bradley-voytek">Bradley Voytek</h2>
<p>#### Professor of Computational Neuroscience at UCSD, former Data Evangelist at Uber</p>

<p>
  <em>Data Science, Zombies and Academia</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Brad has had an eclectic career. From working in neuroscience and academia, to becoming a world authority on zombie brains to contributing to the data science team at Uber as employee number seven, his story is one of embracing learning, overcoming challenges, and cross-pollinating ideas from disparate fields.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>He is currently a professor of computational neuroscience at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD).</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-you-get-to-where-you-are-today">How did you get to where you are today?</h5>

<p>I started as a physics major at USC in Los Angeles, and I briefly worked in an ultra-low-temperature physics lab. As a young kid, I thought that physics would be the direction I would go in. But I realized quickly after working in the lab that it wasn’t really what I wanted to do.</p>

<p>I didn’t know what to do or what my interests were going forward, but I had taken a psychology class to fulfill a general education requirement, and I became interested in the topic. Around the same time in college, I started learning to socialize better and also became more interested in other people. My grandfather, who I had grown up with, had also gotten sick with Parkinson’s disease. Although he was a really smart engineer, he started to decline cognitively really quickly. The confluence of all these things that happened at the same time in my life made me realize that I needed a shift in my long-term career path, and neuroscience became something that I was interested in.</p>

<p>As an undergrad, I started working in a neuroscience research lab, and the very first project I was assigned was to take flat text files and copy and paste different parts into Excel to aggregate the data. They gave me two weeks to do this, and I was like, “This is ridiculous.” I wrote a simple C++ script to do it for me, and I came back the next day with all of it finished. To the other people in the lab, it was like I had worked some kind of magic. Programming was this amazing thing that they did not understand.</p>

<p>From that point forward, I became the “tech guy”. I started automating a lot of the things that were going on in the lab. I found my niche there.</p>

<p>After graduating, I started working at UCLA in the Brain Mapping Center, and I was the PET (positron-emission tomography) scanner operator. PET is a type of non-invasive brain imaging and I was running the PET scanner and collecting data from people. I started doing a little of my own research and used that time to figure out if I wanted to go to grad school and do my PhD. Through this experience, I realized that computational neuroscience was what I wanted to do.</p>

<p>I applied to places in California like UCSD, Berkeley, UCLA, and UC San Francisco. I almost didn’t get an interview anywhere because my grades in undergrad were terrible, but I got lucky and got into Berkeley. It was an amazing environment with a ton of incredibly smart people. Berkeley has just now started its own data science institute, but it was clear when I was there from 2004 to 2008 that this idea of “data science: was percolating through the Bay area.</p>

<p>At the end of my PhD, I was approached by my friend Curtis Chambers, who was the first head of engineering at Uber. He was employee number four in the architectural dispatch system and was a close friend of mine in high school (I was the best man at his wedding). He said, “We have a ton of data, and we don’t have anyone to do anything with it. I know you do this kind of stuff. Would you be interested in working with Uber?” </p>

<p>At that time, I had just finished my PhD, and my initial reaction was, “I don’t think it’s that interesting.” However, as we talked more, I started to get a better idea of the company and I decided to go meet with the CEO. I had lunch with Travis Kalanick, the Uber CEO, and he wanted me to do a coding challenge to see what I knew. I said to him, “Look, you can have me doing coding challenge games, but how about you give me your data to play with? If I haven’t done something cool by the end of the day, that will settle it.”</p>

<p>Travis liked that, and so they gave me some data to analyze. I sat around and hacked at it for a while and, by the end of the day, I had some analyses and visualizations for them. That’s how my work at Uber started.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-mentioned-that-you-applied-to-different-graduate-programs-and-only-got-accepted-into-uc-berkeley-despite-your-low-gpa-what-did-you-do-to-convince-them-that-somebody-with-your-unorthodox-background-could-do-a-phd-there">You mentioned that you applied to different graduate programs and only got accepted into UC Berkeley, despite your low GPA. What did you do to convince them that somebody with your unorthodox background could do a PhD there?</h5>

<p>I don’t know. I wish I had a solid answer. I actually asked somebody very high up in the department how I got into Berkeley when I couldn’t get in anywhere else. The professor said very bluntly, “Well, we looked over your application and thought you were a fuck up, but we thought you were a fuck up with potential so we decided to give you a shot.” I don’t know what the potential was. I do a lot of writing and public speaking so I think I am able to communicate ideas clearly, so that might have helped me in my application.</p>

<p>I think Berkeley also embraced the Silicon Valley ethos where failure is something that helps you move forward. In a lot of other places, failure is generally looked down upon, but I think there’s something to the idea that failure is how you grow. I’ve been embracing this philosophy for a long time, and I didn’t try to hide anything in my application. I said, “Here’s what happened. It’s not an excuse. This is just what happened. Here’s the story, and here’s what I learned from it.” I think most people didn’t really care, but every now and then, it just takes one person to actually read what you write and appreciate it.</p>

<p>Now that I am a professor, I just participated in my first rounds of admissions for the PhD program at UCSD. UCSD’s Neuroscience department is one of the best in the world. It’s a very competitive program, and during the admissions, there was one person who I wanted to admit. This person had a low GPA but had strong GREs and an incredibly strong background. They had thought very clearly to get to the point where they were. They were slightly older than the other applicants because they had done real world work instead of going to graduate school directly, so I highly recommended that this person get accepted.</p>

<p>If you look at other professors’ CVs, listed there will be numerous publications, incredible companies they’ve helped fund, students they’ve mentored who are now amazing professors, and incredible research grants that they’ve received. I remember looking at those as a fresh PhD student and thinking “I’m not cut out for this.” I couldn’t even imagine what it took to write a single research paper and get it published. I couldn’t imagine doing that once, and I saw people with over 200 publications.</p>

<p>In my CV, I actually have a section that’s listed as my failures so for every paper that I’ve gotten published, I say how many times it was rejected from different journals. I list every grant that I didn’t get which I applied for, every fellowship, and every faculty job I applied for but didn’t receive. Everything that I’ve done that didn’t come true is listed in the failure section of my CV, and I’ve gotten positive feedback from students looking at that because it’s a litany of crap. There were papers that were rejected by 10 journals before they got accepted. I think people don’t recognize that behind these incredible CVs of these 60-year old professors, they’ve got 60 years of failures that they had to go through in order to do it. I try to be a little honest about that.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-dj-patil-had-this-great-quote-that-to-paraphrase-goes-something-like-in-the-very-beginning-in-order-to-do-something-new-you-need-to-leap-across-this-chasm-and-you-need-someone-on-the-other-side-to-catch-you-in-order-to-cross-it">DJ Patil had this great quote that, to paraphrase, goes something like, “In the very beginning, in order to do something new, you need to leap across this chasm and you need someone on the other side to catch you in order to cross it.”</h5>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-seems-like-from-your-experience-in-graduate-school-youve-really-internalized-that-and-believe-in-that-now-youre-on-the-other-side-of-the-chasm-trying-to-catch-people-hoping-that-they-can-make-it-across-despite-their-unconventional-training">It seems like from your experience in graduate school, you’ve really internalized that and believe in that. Now you’re on the other side of the chasm, trying to catch people, hoping that they can make it across despite their unconventional training.</h5>

<p>DJ is a smart guy and I like that analogy a lot. </p>

<p>I come from a pretty low socioeconomic status background. My family’s not well off at all, and to get to where I am today, I can easily name at least a dozen people who gave me lucky breaks. Everybody likes to talk about the value of hard work and work ethic, but getting to where I am today required tons of luck. It required someone to reach across that chasm for me, and I don’t know why. I’m certainly on the other side now, trying to do the same for as many people as I can.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-your-exposure-to-computer-science-and-the-idea-of-interacting-with-data-how-did-that-evolve-as-you-went-through-your-undergrad-research-and-phd-research">What was your exposure to computer science and the idea of interacting with data? How did that evolve as you went through your undergrad research and PhD research?</h5>

<p>In hindsight, what I did throughout that undergrad project was very simple data munging. USC didn’t have a neuroscience major at the time. They had a psychology major and a neurobiology major, but I wasn’t interested in neurobiology or cell molecular biology, so I tried to throw together a major on my own.</p>

<p>I ended up taking courses like Introduction to AI and C++ programming. I took these classes because I had several friends who were computer engineering majors and after spending a lot of time talking to these guys, I thought that programming would be a useful skill to have.</p>

<p>When I worked in the lab, I realized that my programming skill was applicable to the problems. For example, the lab I worked in was doing brain imaging, and the analyses that they were doing seemed complicated, requiring the use of obscure programs. I realized at some point  that it was just matrices of data. Once you had the realization that these are just numbers, it allowed me to do a lot more. You can start writing your own analyses and doing things that people may not know or understand. It’s mind boggling because with two lines of Python, you can do much of data analysis much more efficiently.</p>

<p>I told this story once, and someone told me, “In the land of the blind, you are the one-eyed man.” That’s essentially all it is. You find that you have a skill set that is valuable to the field that you’re working in that not everyone has. Suddenly, it’s just something magical that you can do.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-in-1999-i-imagine-that-the-science-lab-was-not-very-technical-you-coming-in-and-applying-programming-must-have-been-mind-boggling-to-them-it-was-something-that-youve-seen-in-class-but-for-people-who-havent-been-exposed-to-programmatic-data-analysis-that-must-have-seemed-like-magic-similar-to-what-you-do-now-at-that-time-you-were-leading-the-way-and-evangelizing-the-different-ways-that-people-can-think-about-and-manipulate-data">In 1999, I imagine that the science lab was not very technical. You coming in and applying programming must have been mind boggling to them. It was something that you’ve seen in class, but for people who haven’t been exposed to programmatic data analysis, that must have seemed like magic. Similar to what you do now, at that time you were leading the way and evangelizing the different ways that people can think about and manipulate data.</h5>

<p>I remember taking a statistics class in psychology. They were trying to use SPSS which is a statistical package for social sciences. It allows you to do things like regression analyses, and ANOVA. I remember being confounded by the idea of assuming that the data followed certain probability distributions. I didn’t quite understand why you’re making assumptions, and I didn’t get the difference between ANOVA and the t-test. Then as a grad student, I remembered that they were all the same thing. You have a general linear model; the t-test, ANOVA, and regressions are just extensions of that.</p>

<p>In my lab right now, I have a lab manager who is a fresh out of undergrad. We were talking about that, and I described to him how a t-test by drawing it on the board really quickly. He said, “I took a year of stats, and I never got it as clearly as I do now from what you just drew.” </p>

<p>It’s shocking to me how bad people are at explaining data, data science, and statistics. It’s not a magical thing. There’s a reason some people are so good at it. It takes some time internalizing and getting it, but once someone shows you that, it just becomes so clear.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-requires-you-to-think-outside-of-preparing-for-a-test-and-see-how-the-ideas-can-become-an-actual-tool-you-can-use">It requires you to think outside of preparing for a test, and see how the ideas can become an actual tool you can use.</h5>

<p>Right. I think my failure to become a physicist was that I was too young to get that. When I was taking physics classes, it was memorizing all these different equations and trying to figure out which equation to plug into. That didn’t seem interesting to me. Now, of course, I realize it’s not what physicists do. I think if I had figured that out earlier, I could see my career path diverging.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-right-now-youre-quite-active-on-quora-you-teach-different-people-about-many-different-concepts-and-i-see-that-as-being-a-very-important-package-of-being-an-effective-professor-or-data-scientist-can-you-talk-more-about-this-missing-aspect-of-data-science-that-isnt-as-heralded-which-is-the-aspect-of-being-able-to-communicate-effectively">Right now, you’re quite active on Quora. You teach different people about many different concepts, and I see that as being a very important package of being an effective professor or data scientist. Can you talk more about this missing aspect of data science that isn’t as heralded, which is the aspect of being able to communicate effectively?</h5>

<p>Yes. I always think back to the movie <em>Office Space,</em> which was making fun of the first dotcom industry. In the movie, there’s a great line where they’re trying to figure out who to keep and who to fire in this tech company. They’re talking to this guy who is a product manager. But since he’s a product manager, he’s not a manager per se, so these guys that came in to interview him are asking, “What do you do?” He’s replied, “I talk to the engineers, and I learn what they’re doing. Then, I relay the information clearly up to the management.” They said, “Why can’t we just have engineers talk to management?” And he says, “They need a people person.”</p>

<p>I think about that a lot. There’s something very critical about being able to communicate your ideas effectively. When I came into Uber, one of the things I thought about was that, before they got bought by Match.com, OkCupid had a really good data blog. They were using all of these dating interactions on their website and metadata about people to try to do analyses about what gets people dates and what people find attractive. I read those well before I was a grad student and well before I got into data science. Everybody loved it.</p>

<p>When I started working with Uber, I was thinking about how the data can be used to tell an interesting story. Just like writing code, telling a story effectively takes a lot of practice. That’s a part of the reason why I do a lot of writing on Quora. I teach, and I do a lot of public speaking at elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools, or at a bar to a bunch of drunken aficionados. It’s practice. Just like I have to sit down and practice writing code, I also have to sit down and learn how to communicate the idea.</p>

<p>My wife is actually a very good sounding board. Whenever I write something, I always pass it by her because she’ll read something and say, “You’re making this more complicated than it needs to be. You can explain this in fewer words. You didn’t connect from A to C. You skipped over B.”</p>

<p>I remember the first time I took a programming class. It was an algorithms course. The homework was to write an algorithm for making a sandwich in which you had to explain every step you took to make a sandwich. You realize so many parts you skip over that you think are obvious, but if you had to program a robot to do it, simple things like pulling the knife out of the drawer must be explained. You have to explain exactly how you pull the knife out of the drawer to spread the mayonnaise.</p>

<p>We skip over a lot of stuff that seems obvious, but it’s not always obvious if you’re not the person staring at that data all day long. It’s a good point of practice to try to remember how to be very explicit about every step that you take and connect the dots for people.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-youve-worked-with-data-while-at-uber-and-have-an-academic-background-with-a-lab-in-uc-san-diego-do-you-think-that-your-academic-background-better-prepare-you-for-uber">You’ve worked with data while at Uber and have an academic background with a lab in UC San Diego. Do you think that your academic background better prepare you for Uber?</h5>

<p>Absolutely. The one thing that you get from an academic PhD in data science is learning to tackle a big problem by breaking it down into bite-sized chunks. When you start a PhD, what you’re doing is saying, “I am entering this 3000-year-old human endeavor of trying to figure out where we are in the world and what we’re doing, and I think I can add something new.” That’s a ridiculous assumption, but people do it head on. </p>

<p>You start reading papers, and you know what you’re interested in. You see that there’s a hole somewhere, that there’s something missing. You think to yourself, “I can add something. How do I go about tackling that, addressing that problem? How do I define the scope of the problem, and what do I need to do to tackle it?” That’s what you’re trained to do as a PhD student and is the important skill that you don’t get if you skip academia and go directly to data.</p>

<p>If you are fresh out of your undergrad and go work in a company like Facebook as a data scientist, you’ve got access to two billion people’s worth of data. Unless you had an amazing undergrad experience, you don’t know how to begin to tackle that. How do you wrap your head around what kinds of problems to ask, and once you have the problem in mind, how do you tackle it? What do you do?</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-one-of-the-things-that-struck-me-was-that-people-in-research-tend-to-de-emphasize-the-infrastructure-required-to-do-large-scale-analysis-thats-not-as-sexy-as-being-able-to-ask-the-research-questions-but-it-gives-you-more-breadth-you-can-ask-bigger-questions-if-you-know-how-to-leverage-the-industrial-tools">One of the things that struck me was that people in research tend to de-emphasize the infrastructure required to do large-scale analysis. That’s not as sexy as being able to ask the research questions, but it gives you more breadth. You can ask bigger questions if you know how to leverage the industrial tools.</h5>

<p>Yes. It’s helped on every level. When I started in Uber, there were seven of us and we were working in a co-working space with a bunch of other startups. The hustle of a startup is something that a lot of large research institutions don’t have. </p>

<p>In my lab, I do a lot of methods development for analyzing human brain data, but previously I did that in MATLAB and posted the MATLAB file on my website and linked to it in published papers. It’s complicated and doesn’t really make sense. Now, I’m converting everything so the code in the notebooks are also tutorials. These are things I’m developing in my lab and growing in the lab culture.</p>

<p>A common problem that’s endemic to academic researchers is if some PhD students or post-doctorates do a really good project but have the data backed up on their computer. Then, if they leave or graduate, the data is gone. This happens at least 75% of the time. These are things that regress in the development of my research lab.</p>

<p>On the actual research side of things, I have learned different ways of looking at data. There’s a company called Lumosity. They do online brain games, which is interesting, but the thing that really interests me is that they have more data on human cognition than have ever been collected in the history of science.</p>

<p>We looked at Lumosity data that measures your distractibility. I looked at the distractibility average across geolocation areas like California, New Mexico, or Washington. You just have these aggregate values, and I pulled up these data that estimate country or state-level IQ and GDP. I found that state-by-state and country-by-country estimates of distractibility correlate with fatal car accidents. Countries or states where people are more distracted are more likely to have fatal car accidents, which makes sense. It’s statistically robust. It doesn’t appear to be an outlier. Ultimately I’d like to publish all the scripts I used to go from raw data to final published figures my research so that anyone who reads the papers can do the same analysis, or build on it.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-youre-one-of-the-few-people-that-weve-spoken-with-who-have-gone-back-from-industry-to-academia-and-it-still-sounds-like-youre-playing-with-private-data-sets-of-different-companies-like-lumosity-and-uber-why-did-you-not-choose-to-stay-in-industry-what-advice-would-you-have-for-these-phd-students-who-will-read-our-book-who-are-trying-to-leave-the-more-standard-track-of-become-a-professor-for-industry">You’re one of the few people that we’ve spoken with who have gone back from industry to academia, and it still sounds like you’re playing with private data sets of different companies like Lumosity and Uber. Why did you not choose to stay in industry? What advice would you have for these PhD students who will read our book who are trying to leave the more standard track of become a professor for industry?</h5>

<p>Getting a faculty job is highly unlikely. Ten or 20% of PhD students will go on to get a tenure-track job, so in my lab, I’m trying to train people to be able to do other things beyond research. We’re doing the research, but we’re also trying to train them in version control, Python, and data analysis to make sure they have a skill set that is transferable if they decide not to go into academia.</p>

<p>As for me, not staying in Uber and going into academia was a really hard call. They offered me a full-time position and a lot of stock. That was before the stock is where it is right now. I was doing growth projections early on, and I knew where the company was going. What made it hard was that while Uber was doing some cool work, at the end of the day neuroscience is where my heart is. I try to refrain from using the word “passion” because people have a misunderstanding of passion, but neuroscience what I really want to be doing. It’s more fun and exciting for me at the end of the day.</p>

<p>Another big part is that I’ve gotten a lot of big breaks over the years, much of which has come through really good professors. I wanted to give some of that back, and academia is one way to do that. </p>

<p>For example, I’m teaching an introductory class on data science at UCSD for the cognitive neuroscience group. </p>

<p>Students don’t understand why they have to do computations, and I’m trying to explain to them that right now part of the criteria of understanding cognition and intelligence is data. Part of it is my desire to give back through teaching. Part of it is that the research I’m doing has a lot of big long-term potential plans in terms of public health. And I have to say that it feels good.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-thats-a-really-powerful-and-amazing-message-to-share-with-people-who-are-going-to-be-interested-in-your-background-that-you-chose-to-stay-in-academia-the-final-thing-i-want-to-talk-about-is-what-is-up-with-you-and-your-interest-in-zombies-whats-up-with-that">That’s a really powerful and amazing message to share with people who are going to be interested in your background, that you chose to stay in academia. The final thing I want to talk about is what is up with you and your interest in zombies? What’s up with that?</h5>

<p>Haha, are you asking what’s wrong with their brains? Actually this has been surprising and how much it’s taken off. This goes back to the science, communication, and outreach. If I go to a high school and talk about how neuronal shot noise and channel leakage leads to an increase in neural noise, or how to estimate areas of communication between brain regions, people’s eyes would glaze over and they’d say, “What are you talking about?” High school students don’t care, and quite frankly, most people don’t care either.</p>

<p>However, if I go back to high school and start talking about zombie brains, show videos of zombies eating people, and explain why zombies are doing that, suddenly people are going to understand. It’s Trojan-horse teaching. It’s a gimmick that we used to do science communication and outreach, and it took off. People are really into it. I was on some National Geographic TV show; Princeton University Press recently published our book, <em>Do Zombies Dream of Undead Sheep?</em>, about the zombie brain soon. We got to meet George Romero, the director of the original zombie movie, *Night of the Living Dead. *There are tons of speaking engagements. I was a guest of honor for a science fiction and fantasy conference in 2014.</p>

<p>It’s a weird shadow career I have, but it’s been a ton of fun. It’s really silly and it works. People seem to dig it. It’s nice. It’s powerful and effective communication.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-out-of-all-the-things-youve-done-in-your-life-the-theme-here-is-your-willingness-to-write-talk-and-teach-peoplethats-also-one-of-the-reasons-were-grateful-that-you-took-time-to-share-with-us-your-stories">Out of all the things you’ve done in your life, the theme here is your willingness to write, talk, and teach people.That’s also one of the reasons we’re grateful that you took time to share with us your stories.</h5>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-thank-you-for-being-so-honest-and-willing-to-share-both-the-stories-of-success-and-failure-and-struggle-i-think-a-lot-of-these-stories-are-going-to-resonate-deeply-with-the-readers-especially-those-who-branch-out-from-the-traditional-path">Thank you for being so honest and willing to share both the stories of success, and failure and struggle. I think a lot of these stories are going to resonate deeply with the readers, especially those who branch out from the traditional path.</h5>

<p>Thanks, guys.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
