<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Hilary Mason</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-hilary-mason">Hilary Mason</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-data-scientist-in-reisdence-at-accel">Data Scientist in Reisdence at Accel</h5>

<p>
  <em>On Becoming a Successful Data Scientist</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Hilary is the Founder of Fast Forward Labs, a machine intelligence research company, and the Data Scientist in Residence at Accel. Previously, she was the Chief Scientist at bitly, where she led a team that studied attention on the internet in realtime, doing a mix of research, exploration, and engineering. She also co-founded HackNY and DataGotham, and is a member of NYCResistor.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-do-you-do-as-a-data-scientist-in-residence">What do you do as a data scientist in residence?</h5>

<p>I do three things. First, I occasionally help the partners talk through an interesting technology or company. Second, I work with companies in the Accel portfolio. I help them when they run into an interesting or challenging data question. Finally, I help Accel think through what the next generation of data companies might look like.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-do-you-expect-this-to-be-a-growing-trend-the-fact-that-vc-firms-are-hiring-data-scientists-in-residence">Do you expect this to be a growing trend, the fact that VC firms are hiring data scientists in residence?</h5>

<p>We’re at a point where there are very few people who’ve spent years building data science organizations in a company or building data-driven products. Having people with even just a few years of expertise in doing that is valuable.</p>

<p>I don’t expect that this will be nearly as difficult in the future as it is now. Because data science is so new – there are only a few people who have been doing this for a long time. Therefore it really helps a VC firm to have access to someone who they can send to one of their companies when that company has some questions. Right now, the expertise is fairly hard to come by, but it’s not impossible. In the coming years, I think more and more people will take this expertise for granted.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-can-you-tell-our-readers-about-the-data-community-in-new-york-city">What can you tell our readers about the data community in New York City?</h5>

<p>We’re not a tech city. We are a city of finance, publishing, media, fashion, food and more. It’s a city of everything else. We see data in everything here. We have people in New York doing data work across every domain you can imagine. It’s absolutely fascinating.</p>

<p>You’ll see people who talk about their work in the Mayor’s office, people talking about their academic work, people in health care using data to cure cancer, and people talking about journalism. You can see both startups and big companies all talking about how they use data.</p>

<p>DataGotham is our attempt to highlight this diversity. We started it as a public flag that we planted and said, “*Whatever you do, if you care about data, come here and meet other people who also feel the same way.” *I think we’ve done a good job with that. The best way to get a sense of New York’s data community is to come.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-else-do-you-think-data-science-will-change-what-will-happen-to-data-science-in-the-next-five-years">How else do you think data science will change? What will happen to data science in the next five years?</h5>

<p>Five years is a long time. If you think back five years, data science barely existed, and it’s still evolving rapidly. It will change a lot in these next five. I’m not going to say what is certain to happen in the next five years, but I’ll make a few guesses.</p>

<p>One change is that some of the delightful chaos will go away. I know fantastic data scientists who have degrees in computer science, physics, math, statistics, economics, psychology, political science, journalism and more. People have switched to data science with a passion and an interest. They didn’t come from an academic program. That’s already changing – you can enroll in Master’s degree programs in data science now.</p>

<p>Perhaps some of the creativity that happens when you have people from so many different backgrounds will result in a more rigid understanding of what a data scientist actually is. That’s both a good and bad thing.</p>

<p>The second change is, well, let’s just say that if I’m still writing Java code in five years I’m going to punch a wall! Our tooling <em>has</em> to get a lot better, and it already is starting to. This is a fake prediction because I know things are already happening in this area.</p>

<p>Five years ago, the most interesting data companies were building infrastructure, different kinds of databases. They were working on special tools for managing time series data. Now, the base infrastructure is mature and we’re seeing companies that are making it easier to work with those pieces of infrastructure. So you get a great dashboard and you can plug in your queries, which go behind the scenes and run map-reduce jobs. You won’t be spending 40 hours manually parallelizing algorithms and hating your life anymore. I think that will continue to expand.</p>

<p>Culture is also a big part of the practice. I think data culture will continue to grow, even among people who aren’t data scientists. This means that within lots of companies, you will begin to see people whose job titles don’t say “data scientist,” but they will be doing very similar things. They won’t need to ask a statistician to count something in a database anymore – they can do it themselves. That’s exciting to me. I do believe that data gives people the power to make better decisions, so the more people who have access to it, the better.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-think-the-role-of-a-data-scientist-will-change-in-a-world-where-every-company-has-data-minded-people">How do you think the role of a data scientist will change in a world where every company has data-minded people?</h5>

<p>Data scientists will keep asking the questions. It’s not always entirely obvious what you should be counting, even for fairly trivial business problems. It’s also not entirely obvious how to interpret the results. Data scientists can become the coach, the person who really understands the problem they’re trying to solve.</p>

<p>Data scientists and data teams do a variety of things beyond just business intelligence. They also do algorithmic engineering, build new features, collect new data sets, and open up potential futures for the product or business. I don’t think data scientists will be out of work anytime soon.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-emphasize-communication-and-storytelling-a-lot-when-you-talk-about-data-science-can-you-elaborate-more-on-this">You emphasize communication and storytelling a lot when you talk about data science. Can you elaborate more on this?</h5>

<p>A data scientist is someone who sits down with a question and gathers some data to answer it, or someone who starts with a data set and asks questions to learn more about it. They do some math, write some code, do the analysis, and then come to a conclusion. Then what?</p>

<p>They need to take what they’ve learned and communicate it to people who were not involved in the analytical process. Creating a story that’s compelling and exciting for people, while still respecting the truth of the data, is hard to do. This skill gets neglected in many technical programs, as it’s taken for granted that if you can do something you can explain it. However, I don’t think it’s that easy.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-why-isnt-it-easy-why-is-explaining-something-in-a-simple-manner-so-difficult">Why isn’t it easy? Why is explaining something in a simple manner so difficult?</h5>

<p>It’s hard because it requires a lot of empathy. You have to understand something that’s very technical and complex, then explain it to someone who doesn’t come from the same background. You have to know how they think so you can translate it into something they can understand. You also have to do it for people who generally have short attention spans, who are impatient, and who are not ready to spend hours studying.</p>

<p>So you need to come up with a solution that uses language or a visualization to facilitate their understanding after you’ve invested all of this time building a complex model. When you think about it, it’s amazing that we can take our complex technical understanding of something and then write it down in such a short, concise way to communicate it to someone who doesn’t share the same knowledge or interests. That’s amazing.</p>

<p>When you think of it that way, it’s not a surprise at all that storytelling is hard. It’s like art. You’re trying to take a really intense emotion or complex phenomenon and express it in a way that people will understand intuitively.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-youve-said-before-that-some-of-the-most-exciting-data-science-opportunities-are-in-startups-given-your-experience-with-bitly-and-advising-startups-can-you-elaborate-more-on-that">You’ve said before that some of the most exciting data science opportunities are in startups. Given your experience with Bitly and advising startups, can you elaborate more on that?</h5>

<p>I’ll explain with the disclaimer that I’m obviously slightly biased. The most exciting data opportunity is when you have the flexibility to collect data. Often you’re collecting data accidentally as a side effect of another product you were trying to build.</p>

<p>Bitly is the classic example of this – short URLs make it easy to share on social networks. You end up collecting this amazing data set about what people are sharing and what people are clicking on across all these social networks. But nobody really set out in the beginning to build the world’s greatest URL shortener to discover how popular Kim Kardashian is. Bitly’s founder John Borthwick calls this accidental side effect “data exhaust,” which is a lovely phrase for it.</p>

<p>That said, if you’re in academia, you don’t have the benefit of having a product there already collecting data. There’s an extra project to do before you even do the work you actually care about. You have to struggle to collect your own data, or go to a company and beg for their data. That’s really difficult, because most companies have no incentive to share data at all. In fact, they have a very strong disincentive given privacy liability. So, as an academic, you find yourself in a difficult position unless you’re one of those people who are able to build good partnerships (which some people are).</p>

<p>If you’re at a larger company, the data you have is probably either stuck in a bunch of incompatible databases or so highly controlled that it will take a huge political effort to get the data into a place where it becomes useful.</p>

<p>Startups are the perfect place where you have a product that’s generating it’s own data. As a data scientist you have input into how the product changes, so you can ask, *“Can we collect this other thing?” *or *“Do you think if we tried this we might learn something else?” *It’s very open as to what you do with it.</p>

<p>I love that aspect that we can learn something interesting from the data. It’s a fun process and a good place to be.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-advice-would-you-give-our-readers-who-are-interested-in-joining-a-data-science-startup-how-should-one-choose-where-to-work-at">What advice would you give our readers who are interested in joining a data science startup? How should one choose where to work at?</h5>

<p>Try to learn more about the startup culture. Startups generally have great cultures – one reason is because startups are much more free to have wide variability in those cultures. You’ll find that some startups might be a great fit for you, while some of them might feel uncomfortable. There’s nothing wrong with you, it’s just a company that’s not a good match.</p>

<p>This is just good advice in general. When you’re looking at working in a small company, make sure it’s a group of people that you’re comfortable working with and that the social environment is one that you’re going to feel happy and comfortable in.</p>

<p>That said, a lot of companies are hiring their first data scientists. Most data scientists have no experience in a job, so it’s very hard to find someone who can come in and do a job well that nobody has done before. I would make sure that whoever you’re working for – whether it’s your COO, CTO or CEO – has a pretty clear understanding of what they want you to do. At least they should be someone you think you could collaborate with in figuring out where you should invest your time.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-elaborate-more-on-prioritization-and-investing-time">Can you elaborate more on prioritization and investing time?</h5>

<p>You’ve got an infinite list of questions you can look into – how do you pick the ones that are going to have the biggest impact? How do you do that in an environment where you might have your CEO demanding slides for a board meeting, your head of sales demanding data, etc., and you have a project that you think is really exciting – but no one else quite gets it yet because they haven’t really sat with you and gone into the data?</p>

<p>If you’re looking for your first job as a data scientist, I would make sure you have a manager who can manage that process with you. If you’re going to be that manager, it’s not as easy as it looks from the outside. That is a skill you have to develop. If you’re going to be a manager, I’d recommend that you think about those sets of problems – how to process them and how to communicate them in a way that fits with the process that the rest of the company is using.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-other-advice-do-you-have">What other advice do you have?</h5>

<p>Look for good data sets. When I interview people for a data science job, they will already have spent a few hours with people on the team. I’ll say, <em>‘You know what we do now. What is the first thing that comes to your mind when you’re thinking ‘why haven’t these guys even thought about this?’”</em> I don’t really care what the answer is, but I want to know that they’re capable of thinking about what the data set is and coming up with ideas on their own for what they would like to see.</p>

<p>Most of the answers I’ve have to that question were things we had already thought of. I don’t expect people to come up with genius ideas in the interview, but just to show that they have that creative ability can be really helpful. If you’re looking at a company or product to potentially work for and you can’t come up with things you would want to work on, that’s a problem. You should find something you’re a little more excited about.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-do-you-have-more-advice-on-prioritization-and-making-an-impact-within-a-company">Do you have more advice on prioritization and making an impact within a company?</h5>

<p>During my time at Bitly and in general, we have a series of questions we ask about every data project we work on. The questions would help not just with personal prioritization but also with helping other people in the company understand what was going on.</p>

<p>The first question is, can we define the question we’re interested in? You’d think it would be obvious that it’s helpful to write down the question in plain language so that anyone can understand what you’re trying to do.</p>

<p>The second question is, how do we know when we’ve won? What are the error metrics by which we evaluate our solution to this question? If we’re working on an algorithm where there are no quantitative error metrics, you at least have to write down that there are none.</p>

<p>The third question is, assuming we can solve this perfectly, what’s the first thing we will do with it? I ask that question to ensure that every project is immediately relevant to the business or product. It’s not just an irrelevant exercise because we’re curious about something. The first thing you’ll do with it should also have some longer term implications about what you understand about the data.</p>

<p>For each data project you’re working on, you need to ask yourself these questions: what are you working on? How will I know when it’s done? What does it impact? If you ask yourself these questions, you always know you’re making a good decision about how you’re spending your time.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-do-you-have-an-example-of-using-these-questions-to-understand-a-project">Do you have an example of using these questions to understand a project?</h5>

<p>One project you might be working on might be, “*Does our user behavior in Turkey differ from user behavior in the United States?” *That might be an immediately relevant question, maybe because of a sales deal with someone in Turkey.</p>

<p>The longer term goal would be to understand if geography affects user behaviour, and if so, how? You should always be balancing those near-term and long-term rewards, building your library of information of what you know from your data.</p>

<p>The last question is, assuming that everything works perfectly and everyone in the world uses our solution, how does it change human behavior? That question is important because I want to make sure that people are always working on the highest-impact problems.</p>

<p>Another question I ask sometimes is, what is the most evil thing that could be done with this? If I were an evil mad scientist in my volcano lair and I had this technology or knowledge, what could I do with it? You get way more creative ideas for what to actually do with it, very few of which are evil. That’s a fun thought experiment to do.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-youve-given-great-advice-on-how-data-scientists-can-choose-a-startup-i-wanted-to-flip-that-question-around--what-general-advice-would-you-give-to-new-startups-that-are-building-their-data-science-team">You’ve given great advice on how data scientists can choose a startup. I wanted to flip that question around – what general advice would you give to new startups that are building their data science team?</h5>

<p>This is always a challenge, and often, people have different ideas of what a data scientist coming into the company will do. So this means that first the founders and management team should really understand what they need now.</p>

<p>You’re sure that you want some business analytics, product analytics, and metrics. Maybe you have an idea to do something cool with the data – perhaps something that’s well understood like a recommendation engine, or maybe even something that’s more creative. But it’s hard to find someone who can do all of these things and potentially can grow to manage a team of people.</p>

<p>The things you can do when you’re hiring is look for people who learn quickly, are really creative, are flexible, and who can work with your engineering team because that’s where they’re going to sit. They need to be best friends with whoever is running the infrastructure that holds the data, and they need to be able to work with the product and business side as well.</p>

<p>That means that you might want to hire somebody who doesn’t have 20 years of data experience but who you think can learn really quickly and grow with the product, with the understanding for that person that eventually a team might come around them or they might hire a manager.</p>

<p>So much of hiring well in small companies is finding the right person at the right time for that company. There’s no one formula that really describes it – it has to be a good match on both sides.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-advice-do-you-have-for-students-who-are-choosing-between-smaller-companies-and-larger-companies">What advice do you have for students who are choosing between smaller companies and larger companies?</h5>

<p>I would say it’s worth looking at the smaller companies. The advice I have there is find someone who you’ll work for who you think would be a great mentor for a year. Don’t just go to a small company because it sounds good. Go to one where you think, “<em>This is somewhere I can learn from for a year. I think I’ll be happy here for about that long.”</em></p>

<p>Then after a year, you can re-evaluate. Am I still learning? Am I doing work that I love? And if not, you can move on to your next learning opportunity. But the first few years out of school will help you learn the skills you’ll need later. Go to places where you can learn things. That’s the best way to think about it.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-other-advice-do-you-have-for-students-choosing-between-companies">What other advice do you have for students choosing between companies?</h5>

<p>I know when you look at job offers, it’s really easy to evaluate them based on how much money you’re going to make and where you’re going to live. I’m a big fan of living somewhere you like, because otherwise you’re miserable all the time, because it’s not all about the money. It’s most important to be working in an environment where you have challenging work with people you can learn from.</p>

<p>For example, I once did an internship in AT&amp;T Labs Research, and I loved working there. It was an amazing place full of really amazing people. But I hated living in New Jersey and commuting on the Garden State Parkway. You need to find that right balance of making sure you’re in a place where you’re going to be happy, but also learning a lot.</p>

<p>Whether you’re making 10 or 20 grand more now, versus years later, it doesn’t make a difference. As long as you’re making enough to have a decent place to live, eat well, enjoy your life when you’re not at work, I wouldn’t pay too much attention to the salary.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-advice-would-you-give-to-aspirational-data-scientists">What advice would you give to aspirational data scientists?</h5>

<p>A lot of people are afraid to get started because they’re afraid they’re going to do something stupid and people will make fun of them. Yes, you will do something stupid, but people are actually nicer than you think and the ones who make fun of you don’t matter.</p>

<p>My recommendation is that if you’re interested in data science, try it! There are a lot of data sets out there. I have a Bitly list of about 100 public research-quality datasets, which you can <a href="http://bitly.com/bundles/hmason/1">see here</a>. You also have access to a bunch of public APIs. You can be creative.</p>

<p>Try to do a project that plays to your strengths. In general, I divide the work of a data scientist into three buckets: Stats, Code, and Storytelling/Visualization. Whichever one of those you’re best at, do a project that highlights that strength. Then, do a project using whichever one of those you’re worst at. This helps you grow, learn something new, and figure out what you need to learn next. Keep going from there.</p>

<p>This has a bunch of advantages. For one thing, you know what data science is actually like. A lot of data scientists spend their time cleaning data and writing Hadoop scripts. It’s not all fun – you should experience that.</p>

<p>Second, it gives you something to show people. You can tell people what cool things you’re trying out – people get really excited about that. They’re not going to say you tried and you suck, they’re going to say, “Wow, you actually did something. That’s cool!” This can help you get a job.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
