<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Michelangelo D’Agostino</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-michelangelo-dagostino">Michelangelo D’Agostino</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-senior-data-scientist-at-civis-analytics">Senior Data Scientist at Civis Analytics</h5>

<p>
  <em>The U.S. Presidential Elections as a Physical Science</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Prior to working in data science, Michelangelo was an undergrad at Harvard in physics. He finished his PhD in astrophysics from Berkeley, and developed a love of working  collaboratively on hard problems with other people while analyzing neutrino data for the IceCube experiment.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Michelangelo started his data science journey as a senior analyst in digital analytics with the 2012 Obama re-election campaign, where he assisted in optimizing the campaign’s email fundraising efforts and analyzed social media data. Afterwards, he worked as Lead Data Scientist at Braintree before he rejoined many of his former colleagues from the Obama reelection team at Civis Analytics. At Civis Analytics, Michelangelo works on statistical models and writes software for data analysis.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Michelangelo has travelled to the South Pole and has written about science and technology for The Economist.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>In his interview, Michelangelo shares his story and offers practical advice on transitioning from a PhD into data science. He also shares his thoughts on data science for social good.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-about-your-career-from-undergrad-to-phd-how-did-you-transition-to-data-science-and-data-analysis-and-what-were-your-various-roles-afterwards">Can you talk about your career from undergrad to PhD? How did you transition to data science and data analysis, and what were your various roles afterwards?</h5>

<p>My career has been strange. Sometimes, it feels like a random walk, but it’s more of a greedy algorithm because every time I’ve had a choice of what to do, I think about what seems like the best opportunity, the most interesting thing for me to do. It’s worked out really well even though there hasn’t been this overarching plan.</p>

<p>I started as a Harvard undergrad and studied physics. I always really loved physics, but I also really loved doing other things outside of physics. So, I took tons of literature and history classes when I was an undergrad. I liked working in the lab and doing the research stuff, but I always had lots of different interests.</p>

<p>I graduated, and I wasn’t sure if I wanted to go to grad school because I wanted to get a job. Looking back on it now, I wish data science existed when I was an undergrad. I really loved quantitative research. I loved the stuff I did in the lab, but it felt a little distant to me. It didn’t feel connected to the world. I think that’s what always made me a little hesitant about research, but there was not really a path for technical people when I graduated from college to do things outside of academia. You could go work in finance, and tons of people I know worked on Wall Street. But outside of that, there wasn’t a clear thing to do. </p>

<p>I took a fellowship to go teach physics at a boarding school in England for a year because I also really loved teaching. It was a great way to experience teaching physics, learn about high school kids and what they’re like, and travel around Europe. I really enjoyed it, and I could really see myself teaching for a long time, but I started to apply to grad school because I knew that teaching would always be there. I liked it and I knew I could go do that, but if I wanted to go back to grad school, I felt like I had to do that relatively quickly before I got too old and just too tired to go to grad school. </p>

<p>I started grad school at UC Berkeley in physics, and I enjoyed the classroom aspect of it. I started doing research in condensed matter physics. I enjoyed that, too, but I was basically in a second sub-basement. I was doing this condensed matter research, and I had this feeling that it was detached from the outside world. Also, it was really solitary.</p>

<p>I made a transition and switched research fields to particle physics and astrophysics. I did my PhD on a neutrino physics experiment that is located at the South Pole. It’s called <em>IceCube</em>, and it’s operating now. We basically buried sensors in the polar ice cap to measure cosmic neutrinos. It was a transition for me because, all of a sudden, I was working with a couple hundred people all around the world, half in Europe, half in the US in all these different time zones. It felt like I wasn’t working on something by myself. I was working on really interesting problems with other smart people and doing really hard work. I think that was what kept me in grad school - knowing that I was working with other smart people in a collaborative environment. </p>

<p>I found out that it suited my personality a lot better than solitary research, and that was when I was introduced to everything I know about data science. That’s when I learned most of the statistical techniques and most of the computer programming I know, and it was when I started using machine learning techniques. Basically, the common thing in particle physics now is you have a big detector, and there are tons of things happening in your detector, the vast majority of which you don’t care about and are not trying to study. But you also have something happening in your detector that you care about. </p>

<p>The whole game is trying to figure out what is signal and what is background. These detectors are so complicated, and the signal-to-noise ratios are so low, that techniques from computer science and machine learning have really infiltrated physics. It’s interesting because the old school professors don’t like machine learning. You go to these seminars with old guys from the 1960s, and they ask aggressive questions and give you these looks. They don’t like these techniques. They just think they’re black boxes. But for the younger generations, they are common tools to do the most sensitive analysis of the thing you care about. </p>

<p>That was how I was introduced to machine learning. For my thesis research, I used a lot of neural networks to do pattern recognition for a particular kind of neutrino signal in the detector that we cared about. I found that I liked programming and statistical work and machine learning a lot more than I liked lab research. </p>

<p>That was how I was introduced to this field, and I finished my PhD. I did a post-doctorate for a year in neutrino physics, and this was when the term data science first came out and people started talking about it. I started reading lots of blogs about the field, realizing that this is something I wanted to do and had the right skills for. </p>

<p>I started messing around with Kaggle when Kaggle first came around. I started learning R and just took any chance I could get to learn–like going to meet-ups and other things that one does to learn these things out of the classroom, messing with data sets and going to hackathons. </p>

<p>One day, as a post-doc, I was in my office randomly reading KDNuggets, which is a blog for learning data science stuff. They posted an ad for the Obama campaign looking for scientists, statisticians, and computer scientists to go work for the campaign. It seemed like an intriguing opportunity for me. I had never worked in politics before, but I had always been interested in it. Because I had been reading a lot about data science and making that transition, it seemed like a good opportunity to test out if I was any good at that stuff and if this work was interesting to me in a low pressure environment as it was only a year. I didn’t have to quit my post-doc. But in reality it was actually the opposite of a low pressure environment being there.</p>

<p>I applied. I had this interview, and I got an offer. The funny thing was I assumed that since it was a political campaign, they would pay me so little money that there was no chance I would be able to accept the job. It turned out that it was basically the same as my post-doc salary, which shows you how well-paid academics are. </p>

<p>I took the job. I started in November 2011 and worked through election day. It was a transformative experience for me in a couple of ways. First, I realized that a lot of the things I was doing were not dissimilar to the things I was doing in physics. I spent tons and tons of time writing Python code to grab data from APIs (Application Programming Interfaces - the way one programmatically interacts with another application or data stream)  or to scrape data. It was a lot like writing data acquisition code in physics. I was doing statistical stuff in R rather than the packages we used in high energy physics, but I was still building statistical models, predictive models. Instead of particle physics models, I was building models to predict how much money a fundraising email was going to make from its early returns. If we sent an email asking people to drive to a neighboring state to canvas, who found the people most likely to respond favorably to that email so that we could just target those people. </p>

<p>I realized that the techniques of working with data and understanding statistics and being able to visualize something and tell a story about it - these were all things that I learned in physics and that carried over really well into this data science context. </p>

<p>We can talk more later about the campaign if you’re interested, but we did lots of modeling, randomized experiments, e-mail fundraising optimization. It was an amazing experience. It was actually the first time I felt the technical skills I had could be used to affect the world, to work towards something that could affect the world positively. That was really cool.</p>

<p>Then, I thought briefly about going back to finish my post-doc afterwards, but I decided that I really liked working in data science more than I liked working in research. It was like the feeling I had when I switched to astrophysics. I like working with people a lot more than I like working by myself. I like to work on things that have more impact. You see a lot more of it in industry, in data science, than you do in research. I like the pace a lot more. I think research can often be very slow, especially particle physics. It takes 10 years to build an experiment now. You have to have a monastic personality to be a physicist nowadays. </p>

<p>I found the pace suited me better, and the work was actually just as interesting or more interesting to me than a lot of the stuff I was doing in physics. That’s how I ended up where I am. After the campaign, I went to a startup in Chicago called Braintree, which does credit card processing for other startups like Uber, Airbnb, Github, and a lot of other growing tech companies. I started the data team there, and it was a really interesting introduction to the world of startups. Then, Braintree ended up getting acquired by Paypal in the fall, and for reasons mostly unrelated to that, I decided to make a switch and come to work with old campaign colleagues at a startup called Civis Analytics that spun out of the analytics shop on the Obama campaign. </p>

<p>At Civis we’re doing really interesting data work for a lot of political clients and campaigns like we did on the Obama campaign, but we’re also working with some interesting non-profit and corporate clients. We’re really trying to do a lot of individual level predictive stuff like we did on the campaign, focused on political and social good work.</p>

<p>That’s my story in a nutshell.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-mentioned-that-some-of-the-most-useful-things-you-did-during-your-time-as-a-phd-were-working-on-hackathons-or-working-on-kaggle-or-data-sets-and-working-with-people-do-you-have-more-to-add-to-that-what-was-the-most-useful-part-of-being-a-post-doc-and-phd-student-for-your-later-data-analysisdata-science-career">You mentioned that some of the most useful things you did during your time as a PhD were working on hackathons or working on Kaggle or data sets and working with people. Do you have more to add to that? What was the most useful part of being a post-doc and PhD student for your later data analysis/data science career?</h5>

<p>I always tell students that I think the most useful skill you learn in grad school is how to teach yourself stuff and how to figure out things that you don’t know. That’s one thing. The second thing is to be stubborn and beat your head on a problem until you make progress. It’s really those two things.</p>

<p>I feel like grad school gave me confidence. Physicists tend to be a pretty arrogant bunch. They think they can learn anything, but that was the lesson I learned in grad school. I don’t know every programming language in the world, but I’m confident that if I spend a few months, I could pick up a new programming language or pick up some new infrastructure tool or modeling technique. I can teach myself those things. I can go out there and read academic papers, read software manuals, and teach myself the tools I need to get the job done. I think that’s pretty common across grad school fields. Most of the things you learn you don’t learn in the classroom. You learn by completing a project and teaching yourself things. In data science, that’s a crucial skill because it’s a quickly growing field and it encompasses a ton of things. You can’t finish a degree and know all the things you need to know to be a data scientist. You have to be willing to constantly teach yourself new techniques. </p>

<p>That was one of the things I learned in grad school. The other is the ability to work on a hard problem for a long time and figure out how to push through and not be frustrated when something doesn’t work, because things just don’t work most of the time. You just have to keep trying and keep having faith that you can get a project to work in the end. Even if you try many, many things that don’t work, you can find all the bugs, all the mistakes in your reasoning and logic and push through to a working solution in the end.</p>

<p>Having confidence in yourself is another thing. I think that working on a really hard problem like in grad school can help you learn that. And then there are just the technical things like learning how to program, running on large computer clusters. Those are the things that I think are really helpful from grad school, but the advice I give to grad students is: if you feel like you want to leave grad school and do something else, keep that in mind when picking which tools and techniques you use for a dissertation. If you can write your dissertation in Python rather than some obscure language like FORTRAN, it’s probably going to be better for you. Try to be as marketable as possible with the things you learn when you’re doing your PhD.</p>

<p>And the final thing is that it really helps to have experience working with data. The only way to learn how to work with data is to actually work with data. You can read about it, and people can teach you techniques, but until you’ve actually dealt with a nasty data set that has a formatting issue or other problems, you don’t really appreciate what it’s like when you have to merge a bunch of data sets together or make a bunch of graphs to sanity check something and all of a sudden nothing makes sense in your distributions and you have to figure out what’s going on. Having that experience makes you a better data analyst.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-far-youve-given-a-lot-of-advice-for-graduate-students-for-example-working-with-more-common-tools-or-working-with-data-can-you-expand-on-that-because-you-are-a-physicist-turned-data-scientist-what-is-your-advice-for-other-physics-phd-students-or-other-physicists-who-are-transitioning-to-data-science">So far, you’ve given a lot of advice for graduate students, for example working with more common tools or working with data. Can you expand on that because you are a physicist-turned-data-scientist? What is your advice for other physics PhD students or other physicists who are transitioning to data science?</h5>

<p>My advice is to recognize the skills that you have. In terms of actually mechanically making that transition, there are lots of ways people can learn more about the field and demonstrate their interest. From a hiring perspective, when I talk to PhD students who say they want to be data scientists, I become skeptical if they haven’t taken any active steps. “Hey, I participated in these Coursera courses or these Kaggle competitions. I’ve gone to the Open Government Meetup and have done these data visualizations.”  Things like that demonstrate that you can work on problems outside your academic specialty, and they show that you really have initiative. They also show that you can teach yourself new things.</p>

<p>The worst thing is when people present the physics job market as terrible, and they say that’s why they want to get a data science job. You don’t want to hire someone like that. You want to hire someone who’s going into data science because of what it’s like, because they want to work on data in the real world. You want it to be a positive thing rather than a negative reason that they’re leaving physics.</p>

<p>To be honest, it’s not a terrible reason to want to leave academia because there’s no job, because you’re lonely, because you’re working on a tiny, tiny problem. Those are good reasons to leave academia, but from a practical standpoint, when you’re presenting yourself to other people, I think you should focus on the positive reasons that you’re excited to do something else rather than why you’re negative about what you’re doing. All those things are true, and all those things are reasons why I also personally decided to leave.</p>

<p>The other piece of advice I always give to job seekers is when people talk about data science jobs, it can mean so many different things. At each different place, when they’re talking about hiring a data scientist, that can mean something totally different. In some places, they just want someone who can run SQL queries and numbers for every report. In other places, they want people who are actually going to build data infrastructure. In other places, they want some people who are going to build predictive statistical models and design experiments. In some places they want the unicorn that can do all that stuff. So it’s really important to ask a lot of questions and figure out what a company really wants when they want a data person. What would someone actually want in that role? Are there other people currently working as data scientists at the company? What are they doing? Is there an engineering team? Is there a product team?</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-mentioned-earlier-about-working-with-people-and-making-a-large-impact-what-about-the-future-of-data-science-excites-you-the-most--what-are-some-of-the-positive-reasons-that-you-would-give-to-graduate-students-on-why-data-science-has-greener-pastures">You mentioned earlier about working with people and making a large impact. What about the future of data science excites you the most?  What are some of the positive reasons that you would give to graduate students on why data science has greener pastures?</h5>

<p>I’ll leave out all the sociological reasons that I already talked about, why it’s more enjoyable to work in a collaborative, fast paced environment, and to see the impact of your work. In academia, you don’t have clients. In physics, I always felt that we had to beg people for money to do what we wanted to do, and that may still be true in data science, depending on your company. But most of the time, there are people who are interested in the output of what you’re doing and really appreciate those skills. </p>

<p>I also think the work is exciting. It’s incredibly exciting, and it’s still in an early phase. I’m not going to go into the cliché of how much data we’re collecting and how all of these organizations are collecting more and more data. Many people have talked more eloquently than I can about that. But it’s true. Organizations have tons and tons of data, and they don’t necessarily know what to do with it. They’re starting to think about what to do with it, and they need help from people like us to actually do that work.</p>

<p>This is the reason that I came to Civis. I’m really excited about future data science applications that people are going to look at and think are benefiting society in a positive way. Like working with non-profits to use their data in smarter ways, or working with all the data that cities are releasing now. </p>

<p>Opening up public data is great, but there are not many cities that are using their data in a real, predictive way right now. New York has done some really interesting predictive things. Chicago has released a lot of data, but Chicago hasn’t done a lot of interesting analytics with its data as a city. They just release data to the community and hope the community will do it.</p>

<p>I’m excited about future applications where data science is going to be seen as a positive force for good, because honestly I’m a little worried. Right now, a lot of the applications we have with data have to do with targeted advertising, cookie collection, online optimization of ad click rates, etc. That’s great, but I’m worried that, at some point, there’s going to be a backlash against collecting more and more data about people. I’m hoping that before that happens or when that happens, there are enough positive counter examples of ways data is being used to benefit people and society that it can prevent some of that backlash.</p>

<p>I wish I could talk about this a little more specifically with the clients we’re working with at Civis, because that’s something we’re really focused on. Before I started here, one of the big engagements we had was with the College Board, the folks who administer the SAT exam. We spent a very long time working with their data and helping them build models to understand which kids weren’t going to colleges and universities commensurate with their abilities. Could we predict that?  If so, what are the implications for designing interventions to help those high school students? I’m hoping that we’ll have more and more examples of data science work like that, work that people feel good about rather than just seeing that companies are trying to collect data from them.</p>

<p>Also, there’s the summer Data Science for Social Good Fellowship that one of the data scientists from the campaign started in Chicago last summer and that I was a volunteer mentor for. Some of the projects we worked on addressed really interesting social impact problems, and I’m hoping there will be more and more of these kinds of applications in the future. That’s what excites me about the future of data science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-when-we-spoke-to-jace-from-khan-academy-it-was-inspiring-to-see-him-apply-his-knowledge-from-quantitative-finance-to-education-how-can-we-encourage-more-of-this-in-the-nascent-data-science-community">When we spoke to Jace from Khan Academy, it was inspiring to see him apply his knowledge from quantitative finance to education. How can we encourage more of this in the nascent data science community?</h5>

<p>I think people really want to do more and more of this kind of work. I think about this a lot. My wife is a lawyer, and almost all lawyers do some amount of pro bono work in a given year. I think it would be awesome if we could get some engineers and computer scientists and data people to do a certain amount of pro bono hours every year working with a non-profit. A lot of people are already doing that as a volunteer thing, but if we could institutionalize that, I think that would really be awesome for the field. </p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-your-background-as-a-science-teacher-and-as-a-writer-is-different-than-most-of-the-other-people-weve-interviewed-as-a-science-teacher-and-writer-how-is-data-science-doing-on-the-pr-side-what-is-data-science-missing-on-the-teaching-and-writing-side">Your background as a science teacher and as a writer is different than most of the other people we’ve interviewed. As a science teacher and writer, how is data science doing on the PR side? What is data science missing on the teaching and writing side?</h5>

<p>I forgot to mention that earlier. I was briefly a science journalist. I took a summer off and worked at <em>The Economist</em> and wrote about science and technology. I freelanced for them for a while after I was in London for that summer. I actually think teaching and writing have helped me become a better data scientist because a lot of what I do is interact with my colleagues on a daily basis. I teach them new things all the time. They teach me things. We sit in meetings and look at graphs and talk through algorithms and techniques, and we ask each other questions. We explain things to each other, and you tell a story about the data. That’s very similar to the things you do in a classroom when you’re teaching people something. It’s very similar. When you’re writing about science, you try to simplify things and explain them to people. Those skills have been useful for me as a data scientist. </p>

<p>As a field, I think data science is doing a pretty good job. There are so many people who are blogging about their work and telling stories about their work. There are lots of people who are writing tutorials explaining different techniques and different projects they’ve worked on. None of that existed when I was younger, and it’s awesome that you can go out, get that stuff, and get an idea of what’s going on. I think that is really awesome.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-sometimes-when-we-talk-with-people-who-come-from-an-academic-background-they-are-suspicious-of-data-science-they-think-of-it-as-a-fad-im-thinking-about-the-hype-that-might-be-behind-that-or-how-some-people-react-to-it-what-would-you-say-to-somebody-who-thinks-its-a-fad">Sometimes, when we talk with people who come from an academic background, they are suspicious of data science. They think of it as a fad. I’m thinking about the hype that might be behind that or how some people react to it. What would you say to somebody who thinks it’s a fad?</h5>

<p>First of all, I think it’s a valid concern. I do worry that data science is being super hyped up right now. Not by the people that are doing it or who know what it’s really about, but there are lots of companies who want to sell people things. A few journalists write an article on something, and everyone else feels like they need to write an article too. Then, it becomes this big giant thing.</p>

<p>I do worry that there’s a little bit of hype, but it’s undeniable that there’s a very solid grain of truth to the whole data science thing. We do have lots and lots of data, and we’re collecting more every day. I can’t imagine that companies and organizations are going to want to be less efficient in the future about how they reach out to people, about how they optimize their own operations. I think that trend is going to continue, and they’re going to want people to help them analyze that data. The skills you need to do that just don’t come from a single discipline like statistics or computer science. They have all the interdisciplinary aspects of what people call data science.</p>

<p>This is why I’m excited about more positive examples of data applications. I think the more positive examples of data science that we have, the more it will help counteract a lot of the hype. I think all the hype has not just been around data science but about tools. Everyone’s been talking about Hadoop. Hadoop is great, but it’s a tool. It’s not the most important thing in the world, and not every organization needs to have a giant Hadoop cluster, but, with the hype, these organizations are like, “If you’re not running a Hadoop cluster, you’re not doing anything interesting with your data.”  </p>

<p>The term big data makes me want to throw up because it’s become an overused, overhyped thing. To me, it’s not the amount of data you have. It’s what you do with the data you have and how you apply it to problems and what interesting things you’re doing with it. That’s so much more important.</p>

<p>I actually don’t think that anything we did on the campaign, when you talk to someone from Silicon Valley, counts as big data. We didn’t have a petabyte of data, but it was what we did with it, how we were changing the organization and the practices of the campaign that was really important. </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
