<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Kevin Novak</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-kevin-novak">Kevin Novak</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-head-of-data-science-uber">Head of Data Science, Uber</h5>

<p>
  <em>Data Science: Software Carpentry, Engineering and Product</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Kevin trained as a theoretical nuclear physicist where he used statistical methods to evaluate theoretical models for nuclear interactions. It was during graduate school that Kevin realised that he liked solving difficult problems, but not in an academic environment. A friend from undergrad came calling and soon Kevin found himself applying his skill-set to solving the mathematics of logistics.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Today, Kevin is the head of data science at Uber, where he leads a team collecting and analysing a vast array of data within the Uber global network to inform product decisions and better serve clients. He talks about the importance of a relentless curiosity to solve problems, and the need to develop a well-rounded suite of skills across engineering, data, and product.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-lets-start-off-by-talking-a-little-bit-about-your-background">Let’s start off by talking a little bit about your background.</h5>

<p>I am a Data Scientist at Uber and run the dynamic pricing group today. I have worn a lot of hats during my time at Uber and have been with the company for about 2.5 years. I’m the second full-time data person and 20th employee at Uber.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-were-you-doing-before-uber">What were you doing before Uber?</h5>

<p>Before Uber, I was a Ph.D. candidate in nuclear physics at Michigan State University. I was there working on the cyclotron in the theoretical physics department. Anything theoretical, but especially physics, requires a lot of computer programming.</p>

<p>It’s a whole, long involved process, but essentially involves using statistical methods to evaluate theoretical models for nuclear interactions. We then evaluated the models based on the output data from the particle accelerator.</p>

<p>We evaluated if models can be confirmed by experimental data.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-got-you-interested-in-data-science">What got you interested in data science?</h5>

<p>I always have been the bad physicist. I have always used computing tools versus using an experimental setup. In undergraduate studies, I wrote a program to build computer-generated holograms. As a physicist, I was always a bit different and did a mix of theory and computer science.</p>

<p>When I went to graduate school, I quickly realized that academia wasn’t the best fit for me. Academia wasn’t what I wanted to do for a career. I wanted to do something different, but my background was weird during those times when I had a highly specialized focus and a wide suite of computer programming skills. It was hard for the middle 80% of companies to find a good fit for the skillset that I brought.</p>

<p>I got a call from a roommate in undergrad, who was an early engineer at Uber. The job description required the ability to write production code and to be good at mathematics. It was the perfect fit for someone with my background and so I decided to join immediately in June 2011.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-mentioned-earlier-that-the-role-at-uber-required-a-mix-of-computer-science-and-mathematics-and-that-other-companies-simply-didnt-know-where-to-put-you-could-you-elaborate-on-this">You mentioned earlier that the role at Uber required a mix of computer science and mathematics, and that other companies simply didn’t know where to put you. Could you elaborate on this?</h5>

<p>It was hard for most mainstream companies to justify hiring a nuclear physicist for a job that is not nuclear physics. That’s true in most specialties. I didn’t even know it was called data science when I started out, and realized that data science was a buzzword that was rapidly growing up.</p>

<p>Data science encapsulates a skill set and a style of background. Almost everyone at the Uber data team is from a nontraditional background. Everyone here was doing something different at some point in their lives.</p>

<p>This unconventional transition for most data scientists may change in the future, but just having the hackerish mentality and flexibility is very relevant for aspiring data scientists. This ability to cross-pollinate ideas is especially relevant for startups where you are expected to wear different hats.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-you-mentioned-a-little-about-what-you-think-data-science-really-is-if-you-had-to-boil-down-the-role-and-purpose-of-a-data-scientist-what-would-that-be">So you mentioned a little about what you think data science really is. If you had to boil down the role and purpose of a data scientist, what would that be?</h5>

<p>Data science is rapidly becoming a buzzword with all the positives and negatives associated with that. It helps to encapsulate a series of broad ideas as a rallying point for individuals like myself.</p>

<p>At the same time it can be easy to hype a concept without actually having a strong understanding of what it is. In my opinion, the field of data science really has two main specialties. One is the concept of “big data”, where large amounts of information are processed to derive mathematical insights. For example, Twitter and Facebook are famous for the products they’ve developed using this work style.</p>

<p>The opposite specialization in data science (probably closer to my job) is a more highly specialized predictive modeler, where there is a need to make quantifiable decisions based on heterogeneous pieces of information. For instance, predictions based on incomplete information from a sales representative and information from another company which had done this before. These sort of predictions require a considerable amount of programming, statistics, and mathematical intuition.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-much-of-your-time-is-spent-cleaning-data-vs-doing-actual-analysis">How much of your time is spent cleaning data vs. doing actual analysis?</h5>

<p>Cleaning data is very different for the two branches of data science that I just mentioned. On the larger end, some statistical errors are negated by the virtue of having a lot of information – the Law of Large Numbers. Everything converges on a normalized distribution; statistical anomalies will very rapidly disappear.</p>

<p>On the other end, when you are trying to do predictive modeling based on a small set of incomplete information, one outlier can quickly throw your prediction off if you do not have a solid understanding of the process or problem that generated it.</p>

<p>The cleaning process is very different between these two regimes. On the smaller end, it is more a matter of evaluating the confidence one has in one’s data, while on the bigger scale, it is more about building up a more homogeneous data set to feed into algorithms.</p>

<p>One of the most rapidly changing areas of the field is cleaning data. There are more data science and numerical computation toolkits out there than there were 18 months ago. Where these toolkits shine is in their simplicity in allowing large amounts of information to be thrown at them.</p>

<p>The operations are fairly simple in terms of cleaning data, but what’s challenging is scaling these solutions to very large data sets.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-some-of-the-most-valuable-tools-and-the-most-valuable-skills-that-someone-should-have-if-heshe-wants-to-work-in-data-science">What are some of the most valuable tools and the most valuable skills that someone should have if he/she wants to work in data science?</h5>

<p>A lot of people have this biased emphasis on algorithms and programming languages. A lot of the programming languages and problems that we worked on 20 years ago are very similar to the problems that we face today. In the big data regime, algorithms that can scale to massive data sets to deliver quick feedback already exist in closed form. So the algorithmic solutions already exist. Where you get paid as a data scientist is the skill in constructing a data pipeline to feed into algorithms and knowing how to apply those algorithms in specific contexts. These skills are all derived from mathematical and statistical intuition.</p>

<p>So a rudimentary understanding of mathematics and statistics will get you 85% of the way there, while the last 15% will come from basic coding skills. A statistical background and intuition will get you a long way. We’re not in academia anymore and can just skip quickly to the solution.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-just-mentioned-this-8515-split-and-for-a-lot-of-people-that-weve-spoken-with-that-have-the-adequate-background-theres-this-fear-that-they-are-not-adequately-prepared-in-terms-of-programming-and-work-experience-a-lot-of-people-are-concerned-that-they-dont-have-the-relevant-practical-skills-to-transition-into-data-science-could-you-speak-a-little-to-their-experience">You just mentioned this 85/15 split and for a lot of people that we’ve spoken with that have the adequate background, there’s this fear that they are not adequately prepared in terms of programming and work experience. A lot of people are concerned that they don’t have the relevant practical skills to transition into data science. Could you speak a little to their experience?</h5>

<p>Different companies have a different opinion about what engineering and statistics background is required for data scientists. At Uber, the data team is fairly engineering-oriented and we do a lot more implementation than a typical data science team. At a lot of companies, data scientists are part of the business or product team and as a result their work is a lot more qualitative, which obviously informs the job requirements.</p>

<p>We have to be able to write computer code in order to solve mathematical problems on a computer. Having the ability to write professionally organized software code is a secondary skill for data scientists at Uber.</p>

<p>Whenever I talk to other data teams, I always ask where the data team is on the organization chart, and that will tell you a huge amount about the implicit skillsets they expect you to have. Software engineering is a non-trivial part of our job as a data scientist.</p>

<p>Both a statistical and programming background are valuable in different ways. You are hired for the programming, but the statistical background is relevant for elevating you to the next level. So it’s really a tradeoff between these two skills which are both valuable.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-recommended-for-people-to-take-a-look-at-where-data-science-sits-in-the-company-structure-so-here-at-uber-what-is-it-that-you-do-that-creates-value-to-the-company">You recommended for people to take a look at where data science sits in the company structure. So here at Uber, what is it that you do that creates value to the company?</h5>

<p>We are at our core an engineering team. In most startups, that setup is fairly common. A lot of what we do technologically is backstopped by data. At the end of the day, Uber is a company about logistics, about getting stuff to people quickly; all of that is a math problem.</p>

<p>On the flip side, the data scientists at Facebook or LinkedIn are a part of their product teams. At the end of the day Facebook is about connecting people and while the data component is a nice add-on, it is not a core functionality of the company. Data informs how they scale the company, but it’s not an engineering problem. So the requirements for a data scientist are different between a company like Uber and a company like Facebook.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-how-do-you-define-personal-success">So how do you define personal success?</h5>

<p>I’m a data scientist and I’m also an engineer. At the end of the day I want to solve problems. So if I can solve problems today better than I could yesterday, then that’s a success.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-for-somebody-who-gets-into-data-science-and-realizes-that-its-not-for-them-what-can-these-people-transition-into">For somebody who gets into data science and realizes that it’s not for them, what can these people transition into?</h5>

<p>A solid understanding of what’s not working will inform the direction of transition better. Data science is at the confluence of computer programming, mathematics and communication as part of the work structure.</p>

<p>If you don’t like mathematics, a better and more obvious role is to get into business development of product.</p>

<p>On the other hand, if you like the mathematics but don’t like programming, an analyst position may be more suitable. Some people are arguing that a data scientist is an evolution of the analyst, but I believe these two roles are on fundamentally divergent paths. An analyst is someone who is answering more financial or quantitative information using an existing toolkit. A data scientist is more of a mix of software carpentry, engineering and product.</p>

<p>If you are good at mathematics and engineering, but not good at communication, I would recommend becoming an engineer. There are a lot of organizational charts in a lot of companies where the engineers are isolated from the other departments. A lot of companies can offer that sort of environment where an engineer can just focus on the problem at hand.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-youve-been-at-uber-for-more-than-two-years-now-and-you-mentioned-this-divergent-path-between-the-data-science-and-the-analyst-roles-it-sounds-like-youve-had-a-lot-of-time-to-see-how-it-evolves-broadly-speaking-what-are-the-qualities-that-separate-the-amazing-data-scientists-from-the-rest">So you’ve been at Uber for more than two years now and you mentioned this divergent path between the data science and the analyst roles. It sounds like you’ve had a lot of time to see how it evolves. Broadly speaking, what are the qualities that separate the amazing data scientists from the rest?</h5>

<p>I’m amazed by people who are intuitive about problems they have just heard about. For example, Josh Wills is a guy who has never seen my data set, and has only ever heard of my problems through media sources. Josh is someone who can come in and, off the top of his head, reverse engineer the statistics of how people are behaving.</p>

<p>Having that sort of intuitive problem skill is very important and on top of the approximation skills will get you 90% of the way there to being a top data scientist. The other interesting skill set is the ability to work and execute on largely open green-field projects which would take an average team much longer to do.</p>

<p>Again, a solid understanding of what’s important and how to build your toolkit is the base for making you a rock-star data scientist.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-the-open-green-field-approach-sounds-a-lot-like-the-way-in-which-academic-researchers-approach-open-ended-problems-what-is-the-difference-here-in-data-science-versus-academia">The open green-field approach sounds a lot like the way in which academic researchers approach open-ended problems. What is the difference here in data science versus academia?</h5>

<p>The perceived limitation of academia is that they don’t have the flexibility to go ahead and do it. At the end of the day, academia is about understanding problems whereas data science is about solving problems and moving on.</p>

<p>What attracts me to data science is the ability to step on the gas and just go. I can solve a problem and move on as long as the relevant people involved in the decision-making understand the solution. The approach is more like <em>ready, fire, aim</em> versus a more methodical process in academia.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-in-academia-one-can-work-on-open-ended-problems-indefinitely-with-no-expectation-of-results-how-have-you-made-the-transition-from-the-academia-mindset-to-a-more-results-driven-environment">In academia, one can work on open-ended problems indefinitely with no expectation of results. How have you made the transition from the academia mindset to a more results-driven environment?</h5>

<p>There are deadlines and very non-trivial ones. I have personally been blessed by having one of the most leading CEOs in the industry. Travis is a data-nut, he loves talking about all sorts of problems. Early on he instilled a very experimental culture towards data science implementations.</p>

<p>One of the examples of this was an experiment we wanted to run where I wanted to build a test bed to test out different hypotheses. Travis told me to put it into production to test it. That to me exemplifies the entrepreneurial attitude compared to academia and speaks to the whole <em>ready, fire, aim</em> concept in entrepreneurial environments.</p>

<p>In academia, the approach would have been to spend a large amount of time doing meticulous contingency testing in order to come up with the best solution.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-more-forward-looking-for-you-personally-what-would-you-say-are-your-personal-goals-as-a-data-scientist-over-the-course-of-the-next-year">More forward looking, for you personally, what would you say are your personal goals as a data scientist over the course of the next year?</h5>

<p>I think we are at a pretty cool time in data science, where data science is on everyone’s radar and we are over the initial wave of hype associated with the industry. We’re still at this phase where 80% of the promise of data science is still unfulfilled.</p>

<p>The leading companies in data, at least in terms of public perception, are still involved in the social space. In my case it is the problem of <em>“how do I give you a car faster?”</em> In the grand scheme of things, the problem space that is being tackled with data science is still very open and expanding.</p>

<p>At Uber, we are solving the mathematics of logistics, but one can easily port the same solutions to solving the logistics problems of the world. For instance, what if one could use data science to give you an ambulance to your location much faster than before? So when one takes a step back there are immense opportunities in the direction we’re moving in for data problems.</p>

<p>So the promise of data science is still very much the tip of the iceberg and that to me is very exciting. To me the first part of unleashing this promise is to start building a community of data scientists to enable sharing of ideas.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-mentioned-that-we-are-on-the-tip-of-the-iceberg-in-terms-of-applying-data-science-to-solving-problems-what-are-some-developments-in-the-field-that-you-think-are-emblematic-of-this-trend">You mentioned that we are on the tip of the iceberg in terms of applying data science to solving problems. What are some developments in the field that you think are emblematic of this trend?</h5>

<p>Every person in data has their own pet project - something they love which they always talk about. I was talking to someone about genomics. There’s a really exciting development with algorithms where we can analyze genomes literally as quick as they come out of the machine. The speedup in analyzing genomes is hugely exciting in terms of the possibility of understanding our world.</p>

<p>Problems in the healthcare space represent a huge data promise. It would be amazing if a doctor could just diagnose a patient without waiting for a lab test that takes two weeks.</p>

<p>Another exciting area is logistics, we touched upon it with the ambulance example, but what if one could get an instant delivery without having to wait 3-5 weeks for it to get shipped?</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-are-there-any-other-final-pieces-of-advice-which-you-would-share-with-people-looking-to-transition-from-academia-to-the-data-science-industry">Are there any other final pieces of advice which you would share with people looking to transition from academia to the data science industry?</h5>

<p>Nothing convinces like success. If you can find a problem and solve it, or even implement your own solution to common problems, that is how you get people excited. Trying to pigeonhole it to specific problems is not the point.</p>

<p>Just solve problems. Start applying data to real life and the rest will follow.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
