<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>John Foreman</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-john-foreman">John Foreman</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-chief-scientist-at-mailchimp">Chief Scientist at MailChimp</h5>

<p>
  <em>Data Science is not a Kaggle Competition.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>As an undergraduate math major, John thought that he was going to be a pure mathematician. A few experiences working as a programmer, combined with a talk with his advisor, pushed him instead into the world of applied math.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After a sojourn in academia through MIT’s Operations Research PhD program, John realized that a long-term career in industry would be more interested and fulfilling.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>John held a series of jobs in business intelligence at various consulting companies, before taking on the Chief Scientist role at MailChimp, a fast-growing, completely bootstrapped, email startup based in Atlanta Georgia that boasts over 7 million users.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>He is also the author of the book “Data Smart,” which presents an overview of machine learning techniques, as explained through spreadsheets.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-start-off-by-talking-about-your-book-data-smart-how-did-the-motivation-for-writing-it-come-about-and-what-type-of-audience-is-it-for">Can you start off by talking about your book, “<em>Data Smart”</em>? How did the motivation for writing it come about, and what type of audience is it for?</h5>

<p>I felt like there were a lot of business analysts and middle managers in the enterprise world who were not familiar with “data science” as a practice and set of techniques.  These folks still lived in a world of “business intelligence” or “business analytics” from a decade ago, and I wanted to bring them up to speed on current methods (for example, ensemble AI models built on transactional data, data mining in graphs, forecasting with error bounds). I wanted to get these enterprise readers up to speed, so I needed to find a language and teaching approach that they’d understand.</p>

<p>A lot of data science books that were being introduced at the time required learning both R and techniques at the same time. With a lot of those books, rather than actually learning the techniques, you just loaded the AI package or the data mining package.</p>

<p>Instead, I wanted to write a book that introduced these concepts step-by-step with a tool the reader knew, and then, once they got it, slowly push them into a programming mode. So in <em>Data Smart</em>, I explained the gamut of data science techniques by using spreadsheets. Spreadsheets are kind of like a functional programming language and GUI in one, and they’re actually pretty good for step-by-step model building.</p>

<p>The last chapter is an introduction to R, and it harkens back to previous chapters now that the kernels of understanding had been planted. For example, if you’re doing an <em>exponential smoothing forecast</em> (which I cover in my book), you should not be doing all these steps every time. You should be doing it on the shoulders of the giants who’ve written the PhD theses you’re using and just open their package.</p>

<p>Ultimately, people who want to know each little detail of how a boosted tree model works or how modularity maximization works seem to love the book. Programmers who are used to relying on black-box libraries, functions, etc. aren’t the biggest fans.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-given-your-interest-in-opening-up-black-boxes-to-examine-the-nitty-gritty-of-different-techniques-did-you-ever-want-to-write-your-thesis-on-a-new-statistical-or-machine-learning-technique">Given your interest in opening up black boxes to examine the nitty-gritty of different techniques, did you ever want to write your thesis on a new statistical or machine learning technique?</h5>

<p>I started at MIT wanting a PhD, but in my first year of graduate work I had the opportunity to do some applied work on Dell’s supply chain, and it showed me that my passion lie outside of academia.</p>

<p>You see, my advisor was really interested in publishing results. Although we came to Dell trying to understand how to help the business generate revenue – which I enjoyed – that wasn’t our ultimate goal. The problem with consulting when you have ulterior academic purposes is that the goal of academic publishing is counter to the goal of helping a business, because in order to publish, you need something academically new to say. But if it’s a new technique, it is often not maintainable by the business once the academics leave.</p>

<p>That was a good experience for me, because I realized that I’m not an academic despite the fact that I like technical things. Rather, I’m an analytics professional who enjoys tailoring technical approaches to business settings where the solutions are sometimes complex but often simple, depending not on my needs as a data scientist but on the business’s needs or the customer’s needs.</p>

<p>That ability to think simply and “edit” models is something I just published an article on. One thing I reference in the article is a paper from 1993 by Robert Holte titled <em>“Very Simple Classification Rules Perform Well on Most Commonly Used Datasets</em>.<em>”</em> His basic premise is that simple decision rules – a single rule that splits the data on one feature – are pretty effective compared to more complex models, like a CART model. That makes sense since oftentimes in naturally occurring data sets within the business, you have a couple of features that are good, and everything else is just icing on the cake.  </p>

<p>One of the things Holte says in the paper is your model complexity has to be justified, and that really grabbed me.</p>

<p>It made me think, especially in a business context, what it means to justify your complexity. Part of that is the additional expense of keeping the model running versus revenue. Part of that is the poor sap you’re saddling with keeping this thing running. And something that people don’t often consider is the likelihood of abandonment.  </p>

<p>Once you move on, whoever gets saddled with it might find some organizational reason or anecdotal evidence to ignore it. They may not even tell you or get back to you. Are you going to stick around and babysit all your models? How do you hand them to someone if they’re complex?</p>

<p>So to come back around to getting a PhD, for me, it was this desire to go out and use data to serve a business, and to do that using both complex and simple approaches that pushed me to leave graduate school early and join the workaday world. I don’t regret it.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-seems-like-the-academics-are-trying-to-do-the-most-complex-models-and-the-business-decision-makers-are-thinking-it-may-not-be-all-that-helpful-that-80-of-the-way-there-is-good-for-us-already">It seems like the academics are trying to do the most complex models, and the business decision makers are thinking it may not be all that helpful, that 80% of the way there is good for us already.</h5>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-more-about-your-background-what-were-you-doing-before-your-phd">Can you talk more about your background? What were you doing before your PhD?</h5>

<p>My dad is an English professor so I thought I was going to do English. Slowly, I realized I was pretty good at math. In my undergrad, I studied pure math. I really liked abstract algebra, and I thought I was going to be a pure math guy. My advisor sat me down and said, “You’re alright. You’ll probably go to grad school in a top 10 program, but you’re really not going to amount to much in the math community.” I felt at the time that it was pretty harsh, but it was true. I couldn’t compare myself to other people doing pure math.</p>

<p>The way math works is a lot of people toy with little results for a long time, and suddenly there are huge jumps from certain people. I would never be <em>that</em> individual who would push the mathematical fossil record forward into a new era. I would be a guy that toys with smaller results. So it came down to a question of passion: how passionate was I about pure math?</p>

<p>At the time, I was also doing research for another math professor on knot tying. I got paid as part of this research group to write code that would take two 3D models of knots and join them into a compound knot without crossing over other sections of the knots and forming a new knot type. It was crazy specific, but I learned a lot about Unix and programming. I wrote code to do simulated annealing in C. I was getting all sorts of memory leaks, and I had to do a lot of stuff in the command line with data sets.</p>

<p>I didn’t know what that was at the time. I thought it was just math research that involved code, but I liked it. It turned out to be my most valuable experience as an undergraduate. After all, what would a data scientist do without piping in Unix?</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-did-you-end-up-doing-once-you-graduated">What did you end up doing once you graduated?</h5>

<p>I did a couple of internships at the NSA over the summers, and I loved the applied, problem-focused environment. When I did my first summer internship, it was all math students hopped up on stories of Bletchley Park, etc. Lots of energy. It was great, but then I did another internship there and they put me in a regular office with regular employees that had been there for a long time. And that’s what ultimately scared me away.</p>

<p>I remember talking to one guy who had a picture of a golf course above his computer. He said, “That’s what I’m doing next year when I retire, playing golf.” Everyone was tired, and everyone was burned out. I figured that a government job wouldn’t be exciting for long, so I began to look at other applied analytics opportunities.</p>

<p>So in graduate school I chose to study operations research where math was applied to optimization modeling. I went to MIT in their Operations Research Center which is an interdepartmental program between engineering, stats, math and business. It was cool because you could take business classes alongside highly technical classes. I got a kick doing MBA case studies because it was so foreign to a math class. No proofs!</p>

<p>I thought the OR program was awesome, so I knew that career-wise I was headed in the right direction. When I did my graduate research for Dell and was able to use the OR concepts in a consulting framework, though, that’s when it all clicked. I applied to analytics consulting firms and the rest followed.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-is-this-when-you-went-to-booz-allen-what-did-you-do-there">Is this when you went to Booz Allen? What did you do there?</h5>

<p>Yes. I went to Booz Allen and did a lot of analytics consulting work. I was on a team called Modeling, Simulation, Wargaming, and Analysis which exposed me to a huge variety of analytics approaches, techniques and problems. One month I’d be doing system dynamics modeling, the next month I’d be building an optimization modeling tool whose GUI was a bunch of Gantt charts. You never knew where the next project would lead.</p>

<p>From there, I went on to do consulting at a boutique consulting firm called Revenue Analytics that does pricing models that adjust prices on hotel rooms, cruises, etc. These models are complex IT projects, so most of the clients who had the data to power them and could afford them were Fortune 500s.  </p>

<p>During this stint, I worked with Coca Cola in Shanghai to build an optimization model that pulls frozen barrels of orange juice pulp from oranges sourced all around the world and blends them together so that every time you drink one of Coca Cola’s Pulpy drinks in China, the feel of pulp in your mouth is consistent. The project felt like discovering some bizarro corner of the analytics universe halfway around the world.</p>

<p>All these Fortune 500 projects were really fast-paced. But from there I jumped to MailChimp, which is more of a startup, and nothing in the Fortune 500 world could have prepared me for MailChimp’s pace. We’re on a release cycle where every four weeks, we’re putting out a new version of the application. That’s light speed for me and, in fact, it’s too fast for a lot of data science projects, especially if you have a lot of infrastructure requirements. I’m the slowpoke of the organization. That’s an exciting place to be because it means people are pushing me.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-one-fascinating-aspect-of-mailchimp-as-a-startup-is-that-its-based-in-georgia-not-in-silicon-valley-or-even-new-york-or-boston-what-is-the-startup-scene-in-atlanta-like">One fascinating aspect of MailChimp as a startup is that it’s based in Georgia. Not in Silicon Valley or even New York or Boston. What is the startup scene in Atlanta like?</h5>

<p>The startup scene is alright because Georgia Tech produces a lot of talent in the Atlanta area. Some of those folks want to stick around our fair city. But that isn’t to say there isn’t a massive magnet out at the West Coast, because people want to go out to the Valley, join a startup, get equity, and see if they can cash in that lottery ticket later.  </p>

<p>That’s a very different culture than what you find in Atlanta.</p>

<p>That’s something that we have to think about when we recruit, so we play to our strengths. We have some of the most amazing data sets in the world. Two of our domains are in the Alexa 500. We send ten billion emails a month and process another three billion events on top of that. We added 200,000 active sending customers this quarter. We’re growing so fast, and the nice thing about that message is it attracts those applicants who want interesting work rather than those who merely want an opportunity to cash out later.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-does-the-company-think-about-staying-in-atlanta">How does the company think about staying in Atlanta?</h5>

<p>There are a couple of advantages in being where we are. What I found is that if you’re in the Silicon Valley, you can be part of a conversation that’s occurring between all these companies, and there are advantages to that because you know where things are headed. There’s also a disadvantage, because you lose a lot of mental freedom.  </p>

<p>In fact, it can instill a lot of fear.</p>

<p>You hear a lot of what other people are doing, and it’s like being on Facebook where everyone’s projecting the best version of themselves. This puffery makes you depressed, and you flail about to technologically keep up with the Jones. MailChimp doesn’t have that perspective, because we are slightly isolated. This isolation allows us a little breathing room to seriously evaluate technologies, opportunities, markets, trends, etc., rather than just jumping head first into something because everyone else is doing it.</p>

<p>That said, the folks at MailChimp get around <em>a lot.</em> I travel nonstop. I speak a lot. I meet with companies. I have conversations constantly with folks around the world, but it’s targeted and intentional rather than getting an earful all over the place because you live in Silicon Valley. What that means is that there’s less fear, so we’re not thinking, “We have to take VC money” or “We have to acquire this start-up.”</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-talking-more-about-unconventional-thinking-youve-written-in-the-past-that-your-model-is-not-the-goal-your-job-is-not-a-kaggle-competition-can-you-talk-about-why-you-dont-think-kaggle-is-where-data-scientists-should-be-spending-their-time">Talking more about unconventional thinking, you’ve written in the past that “Your model is not the goal; your job is not a Kaggle competition.” Can you talk about why you don’t think Kaggle is where data scientists should be spending their time?</h5>

<p>There’s nothing wrong with Kaggle. I think it’s a great idea. If a company’s at that point where they want a model that’s that good and they’re getting a lot of revenue and want to push like Netflix, go for it.  </p>

<p>My one criticism is that the way journalists write about it gives a skewed view of what data science is. There was an article on GigaOM where the author said, and I’m paraphrasing, “The main thing data scientists do is build predictive models. That’s how they spend most of their time.” This is a myth that something like Kaggle will perpetuate.</p>

<p>Before you build a model, you need to know what data sources are available to you within the company, what techniques are available to you, what technologies are available, you have to define the problem appropriately and engineer the features. Usually, when you grab data from Kaggle, all of these steps are done for you. You don’t have to go around looking for data. You can’t say something like, “Maybe they left some data behind. Can I come into your company and look around?”</p>

<p>I feel that there’s so many steps before you get to modeling that are crucial. Can I ever ask a Kaggle competition, “Is this the competition this company should actually be having?”  </p>

<p>Think about the Netflix prize. They were trying to predict what star rating readers would give a movie given past data, but I think they backed off that a little bit because they noticed it’s not all about five-star movies. For example, I watch garbage. I will give it two stars, and I will watch it anyway. It’s more about moods. A lot of things drive viewership, such as what my friends are watching on Facebook. That’s something Netflix is doing now – and it’s made their original modeling endeavor somewhat irrelevant.</p>

<p>So there’s this notion in data science about whether or not a project should be tackled in the first place that is <em>a priori</em> ignored by Kaggle. And I think a big component of data science is questioning why you’re doing what you’re doing – choosing problems to solve while rejecting other problems that are irrelevant to the business. With Kaggle, for better or for worse, that job is done for you. Kaggle is just an exercise in using a data scientist as model-building machine.</p>

<p>I still think that Kaggle competitions are awesome, and I will never match the intellectual ability of some of the competitors on that platform. I just like to emphasize the other fundamentals of operating in a data science role at a company. I wish there was more focus on them, but those aren’t really sexy to talk about in the media.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-some-of-these-other-fundamentals-of-operating-in-a-data-science-role-at-a-company">What are some of these other fundamentals of operating in a data science role at a company?</h5>

<p>Well, one of the fundamentals that everyone talks about is cleaning and prepping data yourself. Finding, pulling, prepping, cleaning, the list goes on. Data manipulation prior to model building is huge. But let’s go beyond that.</p>

<p>For me, a core skill that any data scientist should possess is the ability to communicate with the business. It’s dangerous to rely on others at a business to actively identify and throw problems at the data scientist while he or she passively waits to receive work. When that’s the setup, the business often hands over the wrong problems, because other teams have no idea what data science can help and what it can’t.</p>

<p>But if you’ve got a data scientist who’s good at communicating, then that data scientist can actively engage in conversations with the business and with executives to prioritize how to best use analytics.</p>

<p>I believe a good data scientist is one who’s engaged enough in conversation with the business to say, for example, “Hey, I know you guys think social data is cool, and I do too. But only 10% of our customers are on Twitter, and it’s anything but a random sample. Have we considered using this other transactional data source to approximate what you want instead?”</p>

<p>So now we’ve got two skills that are important other than building models: data manipulation and communication. What else?</p>

<p>There’s one skill that I like to harp on: the skill of editing. People have a strong desire to distinguish themselves from the herd by flexing their expertise. We see this in all industries and jobs. If you have a particular knowledge set, you’re going to show that off. In analytics, the way that tendency manifests is by making models overly complex. And by that, I don’t mean “using a complex model when a simple one gives the same performance.”</p>

<p>No, I mean “using a complex model that is brittle and overly burdensome for the organization to maintain, i.e. whose likelihood of abandonment is high, when a simpler model has a better chance of long-term survival.” Sometimes that means using a simpler model even when some performance is lost. That takes an editing eye. And in data science, as in many disciplines whether that be journalism, oil painting, or speechwriting, editing distinguishes the experienced practitioner from the newbie.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-one-of-the-big-ideas-you-mentioned-is-the-fact-that-complex-model-building-is-not-what-a-data-scientist-spends-most-of-his-time-on">One of the big ideas you mentioned is the fact that complex model-building is not what a data scientist spends most of his time on.</h5>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-do-you-think-in-the-future-when-there-are-more-tools-built-for-data-scientists-to-take-care-of-all-the-steps-before-modeling-data-scientists-will-in-fact-be-spending-most-of-their-time-on-complex-modeling">Do you think, in the future when there are more tools built for data scientists to take care of all the steps before modeling, data scientists will in fact be spending most of their time on complex modeling?</h5>

<p>I think we’re already seeing the commoditization of a lot of these skills. It’s not that hard to read a book on R and learn how to build models. It’s pretty easy, and that’s where online education can come in and fill in a lot of technical gaps. If that’s all you need as a business, I have faith that not only can cheap labor fill in that gap, but tools are eventually going to get there, too.</p>

<p>The part what will be irreplaceable is knowing what’s possible from an analyst’s perspective. So, there are a lot of unsupervised techniques, but knowing these techniques and identifying data and opportunities within the company where those opportunities can be married with the data is not purely a technical problem. It’s a creative problem. It’s knowing all these things and being able to connect the dots. I feel like that’s going to be a very human problem for a very long time.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-this-is-related-to-what-youve-said-before--that-a-data-scientist-is-a-renaissance-figure-because-its-connected-to-sociology-ecology-business-computer-science-and-math-where-you-put-it-all-together-to-solve-problems">This is related to what you’ve said before – that a data scientist is a Renaissance figure because it’s connected to sociology, ecology, business, computer science and math where you put it all together to solve problems.</h5>

<p>Right. One of the things I’ve noticed whenever we try to hire data scientists is that the most effective data scientists are the ones who can communicate effectively. They can talk to people. They can communicate in writing. They can craft an e-mail. They can craft a document that’s technical while also lucidly explaining what they’re doing. They can tell a story. Those are skills that are refined by studying, wrestling with and arguing ideas across disciplines. And when I encounter data scientists who often enter the discipline tangentially through a variety of other disciplines, I see this breadth and the way it facilitates communication.</p>

<p>Now, why do I think that’s important?</p>

<p>Just as crucial as data cleaning is to the beginning of a modeling engagement, communication in the form of change management is crucial during and at the end of a modeling engagement.</p>

<p>Change management is the idea that after you build a model, how do you get other people to use it? You don’t just walk into a business and say, “I built you a model. Trust it.” There are issues around working with people, communicating, and understanding their context that don’t come from just learning to do data modeling. That’s a completely different skill set and it’s one that the Renaissance person (i.e. an employee with a wide breadth of study and experience) is more likely to possess. If I’m going to be telling stories and communicating to a wide group of people, I need more training than just being siloed in the math department.  </p>

<p>So I try to hire people who look like that. They can do all these things. They can talk to people. They can write spaghetti code. They can push around data. They can build prototypes.  </p>

<p>We’re seeing this Renaissance-person idea, i.e. this multidisciplinary, quasi-quantitative, quasi-liberal arts approach affect a whole host of disciplines. Just look at the new “digital humanities” movement where things like the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database are being built that historians, linguists, etc. are setting their SQL on.</p>

<p>I love that we’re seeing data and the humanities collide, and that’s happening in business, too. That’s why we have this weird hybrid concept of a data scientist who’s not really a scientist. When you look at the preeminent data scientists out there, they are not people who are just in a lab acting out your canonical, stereotypical view of a scientist. A lot of them are writers and speakers and executives and a whole host of other things than your typical white-coated scientist.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-at-the-same-time-there-exist-a-lot-of-the-people-who-are-doing-that-are-in-a-phd-or-are-considering-a-phd-and-one-of-the-reasons-theyre-attracted-to-data-science-is-because-theyve-heard-that-it-applies-to-their-researching-skills-in-the-industry-given-all-the-things-you-mentioned-that-couldnt-be-acquired-by-staying-in-the-math-library-do-you-think-this-idea-of-the-data-scientist-as-an-applied-researcher-is-a-misconception">At the same time, there exist a lot of the people who are doing that are in a PhD or are considering a PhD, and one of the reasons they’re attracted to data science is because they’ve heard that it applies to their researching skills in the industry. Given all the things you mentioned that couldn’t be acquired by staying in the math library, do you think this idea of the data scientist as an applied researcher is a misconception?</h5>

<p>There are certain companies where there’s a resemblance between the two. For example, if I’m going to be doing ad targeting on Facebook, I’m going to be part of Yann LeCun’s new deep learning lab. I imagine for that type of data science, academics are going to find that a fine transition.  </p>

<p>However, there is a vast array of companies now that think they need data science talents, and the data science talent they need is not someone who has been specializing in one particular academic area for six years of graduate school.</p>

<p>That’s not what companies need. They need someone with a broader skill set.</p>

<p>I’ve seen too many PhDs go into companies with a not-my-job mindset where they’re going to wait for you to bring them a problem that fits perfectly with their expertise. If you don’t bring them that problem, it’s not their job. I get it – they fought hard for that doctorate.</p>

<p>But this is a dangerous way of thinking that could sour a lot of people in the industry.  </p>

<p>I like people who are more aggressive and want to find problems to solve. Maybe they don’t get to use the techniques they’ve used in the past, but they know there are a lot of analogous concepts in these techniques. For example, one of the things I put out in my book is that machine learning algorithms, whether they’re unsupervised data mining techniques, AI modeling, or forecasting, all have an optimization component.  </p>

<p>The point I’m trying to make is that even though you are focused on one thing, all these things are related. All these concepts are related. Cluster detection and outlier detection are two sides of the same coin in a graph, and I try to tie them together to show people that if you can do one of these things, you can do all of them. You should be excited to learn all these things and figure out which ones you can use forever.</p>

<p>You’re like a kid in a candy store where you’ve got all these opportunities to do these things. Those are people I would love to see move into this industry. Some of those folks are PhDs, but sometimes the specialization that comes with too much time in graduate school can be a burden.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-as-more-people-move-into-and-understand-data-science-do-you-think-that-the-future-will-bring-data-and-statistics-literacy-for-the-masses">As more people move into and understand data science, do you think that the future will bring data, and statistics, literacy for the masses?</h5>

<p>Knowing how slow academia moves, it’s going to take some time to get there. I went to the University of Georgia, and everyone there had to take a math class where the textbook had a cover with Waffle House on it, which shows you the level of math they were learning. I think we’re moving into a world where people need to know more math, and it’s no longer acceptable to say, “I’m not good at math. Math isn’t for me.”</p>

<p>Everyone’s going to have to be literate. When I worked in management consulting, I met a lot of strategy consultants who came from non-quantitative backgrounds, but every single one of them knew how to do a pivot table. They knew how to write a VBA macro and filter data. They knew the basics of how to move data around in a spreadsheet. They would never call it math or programming, but it’s pseudo-math-programming. Oddly enough though, those simple skills were an essential part of what the client was paying for.</p>

<p>I think there’s going to be more of that need in the future. People are going to need to know how to do things like significance tests, sample size calculations and so on. We need to find a way to fit this data literacy into a liberal arts curriculum. That requires motivating the concepts.  </p>

<p>In <em>“Data Smart”</em> I try to motivate people to learn these techniques as much as possible by showing how to explicitly use them in business. The cool thing with teaching people later on in life, once they have a job, is that the motivation totally clicks. When it comes to teaching students, especially those majoring in something else, they’re unmotivated. School’s never really cracked that nut, but I think it’s headed that way. People need to be data-literate. There’s no way we’re going to get by without it.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-at-the-same-time-theres-a-debate-in-some-parts-of-the-valley-there-are-people-saying-that-numbers-are-pushing-out-the-usage-of-human-intuition-and-that-theres-an-over-usage-of-analytics-where-youre-ab-testing-every-shade-of-green-on-your-button-and-you-go-with-whichever-one-performs-the-best-as-the-future-becomes-more-driven-whats-your-take-on-this-type-of-criticism">At the same time, there’s a debate in some parts of the Valley. There are people saying that numbers are pushing out the usage of human intuition, and that there’s an over-usage of analytics, where you’re AB testing every shade of green on your button and you go with whichever one performs the best. As the future becomes more driven, what’s your take on this type of criticism?</h5>

<p>I do agree, and I think that approach is dangerous. At MailChimp, we often make fun of Key Performance Indicators, aka KPIs, which are the lifeblood of the corporate analytics world. When we listen in to the quarterly calls our competitors have, we can see they’re driven by metrics like ARPU (average revenue per user) so much so that they’ve lost sight of things that are not unimportant but are just harder to measure.</p>

<p>You’re optimizing average revenue per user not because it’s the most important things but because you can measure it and Wall Street can measure it and look at it. That’s a way to grade your company, but what does average revenue per user mean when there are users on your Facebook site saying, “I fucking hate you guys”? That could be a red light that something is wrong, but you’re not paying attention to it because it’s not a metric you care about.</p>

<p>I think we should leave room for people to be creative and to think about soft things like customer happiness. At MailChimp, we purposely don’t measure a lot of metrics against our marketing team. Our marketing team has a budget, but we don’t look at things like conversion. We took out billboards in cities across the US, and the billboards just have a picture of Freddie, our chimp mascot, with a blue background and no words at all. The only people who really understand what it is are already MailChimp customers and maybe our competitors.  </p>

<p>We can’t look at conversion of that, or how it affects revenue. That’s not something we’re interested in. It’s about giving our users a good experience. They see a billboard on their way to work, and they’re thinking, *“Aww… That’s MailChimp.” *And there’s value there. It’s like an inside joke in a subtle way. I might go to a conference and have a MailChimp user come up to me who’s excited to meet someone from MailChimp. They might say, “I love using your site. It’s so much fun. It’s one of the best sites I use for my job.” That’s great. That’s a kind of person who’s going to go tell other people about our product, but we don’t have to measure it.</p>

<p>Its better that we just keep delighting customers so they tell other people about the product rather than AB-test button colors. I’m perfectly happy to leave things in the hands of talented designers, people who are not quantitative but know what they’re doing.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-have-you-ever-heard-of-tony-hsieh-zappos-ceo-downtown-project-in-vegas-he-moved-the-headquarters-of-the-online-retailer-from-the-silicon-valley-to-vegas-his-perspective-is-that-its-important-to-engender-serendipity-but-not-with-contrived-methods-although-he-runs-a-tech-company-hes-much-more-open-to-the-intangible-things-such-as-human-creativity-and-experimentation">Have you ever heard of Tony Hsieh, Zappos CEO, Downtown Project in Vegas? He moved the headquarters of the online retailer from the Silicon Valley to Vegas. His perspective is that it’s important to engender serendipity but not with contrived methods. Although he runs a tech company, he’s much more open to the intangible things such as human creativity and experimentation.</h5>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-its-interesting-having-two-well-known-companies-in-very-different-parts-of-the-world-that-are-technology-driven-but-not-in-silicon-valley-and-as-a-result-they-think-of-things-differently-than-other-firms-do-you-think-theres-any-relationship-between-being-not-in-the-valley-and-being-able-to-think-the-manner-you-described">It’s interesting having two well-known companies in very different parts of the world that are technology-driven but not in Silicon Valley, and as a result they think of things differently than other firms. Do you think there’s any relationship between being not in the Valley and being able to think the manner you described?</h5>

<p>Honestly, part of that for us is that we are privately owned. We are not seeking to go public, and we’re not taking funding from any other companies. We have the freedom to be creative, because there’s no one breathing down our neck.</p>

<p>MailChimp’s bootstrapped, and, because of that, we have immense freedom. We’re not trying to sell the company to someone else. When your goal is to sell your company, things can get perverse. You get distracted, and that is dangerous from a competitive standpoint. If we get distracted, we might check out or lose sight of what other competitors are doing. Part of our different perspective is driven by being outside of the Valley. But another large part of it has been knowing that we’re not taking funding.</p>

<p>A lot of people these days are interested in <em>starting</em> companies – being founders, etc. We at MailChimp are interested in being a company in the long-term. That looks very different, and I’d argue it’s a better place to be as a data scientist. When you’re a data scientist at a young company looking to go public or be acquired, then your work ends up getting commandeered for marketing purposes. It becomes difficult to invest in analytics that might have long-standing customer value versus some short-term <em>wow!</em> factor.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-wow-thats-a-pretty-amazing-distinction-between-mailchimp-and-other-tech-startups-ive-heard-of-one-project-at-mailchimp-called-the-email-genome-project-can-you-talk-more-about-that">Wow. That’s a pretty amazing distinction between MailChimp and other tech startups. I’ve heard of one project at MailChimp called the Email Genome Project. Can you talk more about that?</h5>

<p>The Email Genome Project was essentially an infrastructure initiative at MailChimp to create a dossier for every e-mail address we’ve ever seen and store data about it. In fact, right now it resides in RAM. It’s one of the largest in-RAM databases in the world. We use Redis to do it, so it’s essentially a big Redis key-value store summarizing interactions we’ve had with about three billion unique e-mail addresses.  </p>

<p>We built APIs around this data store and use those internal APIs to power data products. We have an anti-abuse AI model called Omnivore, and that runs off EGP. One of my favorite internal products is called NotABot. When users sign up for MailChimp, we check NotABot, and if you look legit, we hide CAPTCHA because of everything we know about you. We say, “We’ve already looked at your behavior. We know you’re a human, so you’re good to go and we’re just going to hide the CAPTCHA.”</p>

<p>The funny thing is that the data science project is not something built in D3. It’s not something cool with bubbles. Literally, this data science product is <em>the absence of something</em>. All I’ve done is taken CAPTCHA away, and I feel very proud of that. Removing things improves the user experience; this is one way to make users’ lives suck just a little bit less.</p>

<p>We had CAPTCHA in front of our help form to contact support, but when you want to contact customer support, you already have a problem. It’s a perfect opportunity to reduce friction for these confused people rather than adding some shitty CAPTCHA icing to their confusion cake. That’s a small project we’ve done, and we’ve done a lot of things like that using EGP’s internal APIs. We tell people, “Here’s what this API call does. Here’s the data that backs it.” Then we expose the API call to the devs and see what happens.  </p>

<p>We did another project called Send Time Optimization where we noticed a couple of things. One was people asking what time they should send. People were going online and just reading anecdotes. It’s not like all your customers go to work from 9 to 5 and take lunch at noon. But those are the kind of assumptions you’ll see in anecdotes from supposed marketing gurus.</p>

<p>One of the things data science promises is that we can provide people’s personal experiences. Using EGP, MailChimp can tell you about <em>your particular subscribers</em>. What do you know about their behavior? If you’re writing to line cooks who work the night shift, they’re probably not awake at 2 PM. So what Send Time Optimization (STO) does is it pulls all the records for these email addresses (even if we have new e-mail addresses, we’ve seen them before due to other MailChimp email they’ve gotten), and using those records, STO hands you a send-time recommendation. Anecdotes are for chumps.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-does-mailchimp-then-use-data-science-to-power-these-personalized-product-features">How does MailChimp then use data science to power these personalized product features?</h5>

<p>So far I’ve laid out a few of MailChimp’s data science products: Omnivore for anti-abuse, Send Time Optimization, and NotABot. But we’ve got a lot more. For instance, we use AI models trained on past interactions with customer support to make knowledge-based article recommendations. We use data mining algorithms to find segments on people’s lists and suggest those segments to them. We use optimization modeling to schedule our customer support employees to meet forecasted ticket demand. We use a lot of Holt-Winters with prediction intervals when making infrastructure forecasts.</p>

<p>Some of these products are supervised machine learning products, others are classic ops research products, graph mining products, forecasts, etc. We use whatever techniques and whatever data gets the job done.</p>

<p>Some products are user-facing, some are internal. Some are big and require tons of infrastructure. Others, like our likelihood-to-pay model, are nothing more than a logistic regression whose coefficients fit in a single short vector.</p>

<p>So how do we use data science to power these products? Any way we can.</p>

<p>The one common theme these products have is not an approach or a data source or a technology. The one common theme is that each product solves a problem for the business or the customer. I run my data science team like an internal consultancy. We’re all about being useful.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-theres-this-joke-going-around-making-fun-of-data-scientists-that-says-that-a-data-scientist-is-just-a-statistician-who-lives-in-california-who-calls-himself-that-to-get-a-job-given-that-youre-someone-who-is-both-professionally-a-data-scientist-yet-at-the-same-time-seems-to-share-a-sense-of-skepticism-about-things-that-are-overhyped-what-is-your-take-on-the-burgeoning-field-of-data-science">There’s this joke going around making fun of data scientists that says that a data scientist is just a statistician who lives in California who calls himself that to get a job. Given that you’re someone who is both professionally a data scientist, yet at the same time seems to share a sense of skepticism about things that are overhyped, what is your take on the burgeoning field of data science?</h5>

<p>I think the term “data science” is somewhat ludicrous. The phrase “Data science” is two vague words glommed together that don’t actually describe most of how I spend my time. Data science as a term may die, nothing but a fad title, but the skill set is so important that it will spread into many roles within the business. It wouldn’t surprise me if, a few years from now, most MBAs require a couple of data science-style classes.</p>

<p>The field is just going to get into the water.  </p>

<p>The more you investigate data science as a category, the more you see it’s an umbrella term disguising insane amounts of variety in skill sets and backgrounds. A data scientist is unlike a stonemason in that way. There isn’t one background for data scientists and there isn’t one thing that we do. We’ve seen data scientists who are more data engineers. We’ve seen data scientists who are AI professionals. We’ve seen data scientists who are good at visualization and doing front end development.  There are data scientists like me who are nothing more than embedded strategy consultants who like math.  </p>

<p>The term could die or fracture into multiple titles, but need for those skill sets won’t. Students tend to worry about that and say, “People won’t need data scientists by the time I graduate.” They’ll need <em>something like a data scientist for sure</em>, so just call yourself that. My past job titles used to include words like “analytics” and “business intelligence.” That’s fine. The terms come in and out of style, but if you are good at understanding problems and communicating with people, and answering their questions with data, the need for you in particular will never go away. You will never be automated. You will have plenty of job security.  </p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-during-a-conversation-we-had-with-dj-patil-he-told-a-story-of-how-at-some-point-he-consulted-for-the-us-government-when-they-were-in-afghanistan-he-mentioned-how-there-was-a-lot-of-chaos-and-everything-was-going-crazy-but-there-was-a-lot-of-opportunity-that-came-out-of-that-chaos-and-you-could-influence-people-because-no-one-knew-what-was-going-on">During a conversation we had with D.J. Patil, he told a story of how, at some point, he consulted for the US government when they were in Afghanistan. He mentioned how there was a lot of chaos and everything was going crazy, but there was a lot of opportunity that came out of that chaos and you could influence people because no one knew what was going on.</h5>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-data-science-seems-to-be-evolving-in-the-same-way-where-theres-chaos-theres-uncertainty-and-as-a-result-plenty-of-opportunity-do-you-think-there-are-going-to-be-large-opportunities-in-the-future-as-data-and-technology-become-more-prevalent">Data science seems to be evolving in the same way: where there’s chaos, there’s uncertainty and as a result, plenty of opportunity. Do you think there are going to be large opportunities in the future as data and technology become more prevalent?</h5>

<p>Yes. I touched on this in <a href="http://gigaom.com/2014/01/18/you-dont-want-your-privacy-disney-and-the-meat-space-data-race/">an article I wrote about Disney</a><em>.</em>  The “meat space” world, i.e. the one not confined to a screen, is full of chaos and uncertainty, and so there’s huge opportunity to take the analytics we’ve been doing for web companies and move it out of that orderly sandbox and into the physical world.</p>

<p>Obviously, wearables are an immediate example of how that’s happening. But humans are being “cookied” in meat space by more than just wearables. Think about Nest (and how much Google paid for it). We’re doing all sorts of physical tracking, such as MAC address tracking in stores and appending demographic data to surveillance video feeds, so we understand a bit about your demographics and what racks you go to in department stores.</p>

<p>Disney saw this opportunity when they introduced a long-range tracking component to their wristbands. They track you in physical space so that they can provide personal experiences in the physical world and not online. My kids rode “Pirates of the Caribbean” eight times at Disney World. Then we visited this animatronic Mickey and all he would talk about were pirates, because he knew that’s what my kids were into based on their transactions in the physical world.</p>

<p>The physical world is messy and chaotic, nonetheless we can understand people’s actions as they move throughout that space. That’s where I see the most opportunity for data science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-sounds-like-the-overarching-theme-is-that-the-personalization-of-the-internet-of-visual-space-is-going-to-move-towards-the-personalization-of-the-physical-world">It sounds like the overarching theme is that the personalization of the internet, of visual space, is going to move towards the personalization of the physical world?</h5>

<p>It’s going to merge. In fact, the internet is simpler than the real world because I can “cookie” you on the internet. We’re going to learn how to cookie people all over the physical world too, and I think people are freaked out about this from a privacy perspective. I agree and sympathize. There’s a creepy side to the word “personalization.”</p>

<p>It’s a frightening affront to our personal freedom. While I’ve gotta live my work-a-day life, there will be companies tracking me that will be dedicated to getting me to do one thing, like opening a credit card or drinking a Coke. It’ll be data-driven asymmetric warfare. They have my data. They know my issues – financial, personal, etc. Their models will know how to target me. They can pull my strings.</p>

<p>I think that is concerning, but, at the same time, we’re doing this to ourselves and share the blame. I install whatever mobile app I want to and just blaze through the permissions. People always say “but it’s <em>my data.</em>” If you give it up in exchange for a free game, it may not be anymore. The undervaluation of personal data by consumers is endemic today.</p>

<p>So yes, personalization on the internet will morph into personalization everywhere. But we’ve got to figure out all this creepy stuff as we head in that direction. Part of that will be cultural, and part of that I’d imagine will be legal and legislative.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-a-term-ive-heard-before-is-data-superhero-and-its-the-idea-of-putting-yourself-as-a-data-scientist-into-a-position-where-no-one-in-congress-knows-what-data-science-is-theyve-never-read-data-smart-and-the-superhero-is-the-one-who-knows-what-it-is-and-is-able-to-inform-people-and-stand-up-for-the-public-interest">A term I’ve heard before is “data superhero”, and it’s the idea of putting yourself, as a data scientist, into a position where no one in Congress knows what data science is. They’ve never read <em>“Data Smart”</em>, and the superhero is the one who knows what it is and is able to inform people and stand up for the public interest.</h5>

<p>Data scientists have a particular set of skills and knowledge that makes them essential to business today. A lot of that knowledge and skill is being used to blaze new trails for how we as individuals, consumers, citizens, etc. interact with businesses, our government, our peers. There is abuse and confusion as well as opportunity to fundamentally change entire industries and practices for the better.</p>

<p>Given that, data scientists can take on public-facing roles as subject matter experts. People want to know what’s possible with data, both to understand if abuse is possible as well as to understand if progress is possible. Too many people think of data science as magic, but data scientists can come in and bring the discussion back down to earth. We can say, “no that’s not possible,” and “yes that’s possible,” and “yes that other thing is possible but you’ll need express legal consent from consumers,” and so on.</p>

<p>And that’s a role we should take up, because if data scientists don’t engage the conversation then we should expect voices with less training to fill that information vacuum.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
