<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Sean Gourley</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-sean-gourley">Sean Gourley</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-co-founder-and-cto-at-quid">Co-Founder and CTO at Quid</h5>

<p>
  <em>From Modeling the War to Augmenting Human Intelligence</em>
</p>

<p>*Sean is a Physicist, decathlete, political advisor, and TED fellow. He is originally from New Zealand where he ran for national elected office and helped start New Zealand’s first nanotech company. Sean studied at Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, where he received a PhD for his research on the mathematical patterns that underlie modern war. *</p>

<p>
  <em>This research has taken him all over the world, from the Pentagon, to the United Nations and Iraq. Previously, Sean worked at NASA on self-repairing nano-circuits and is a two-time New Zealand track and field champion. Sean is now based in San Francisco where he is the co-founder and CTO of Quid, an augmented intelligence company.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-to-start-off-can-you-tell-us-a-little-bit-more-about-your-background-from-your-early-days-to-now">To start off, can you tell us a little bit more about your background from your early days to now?</h5>

<p>For starters, I’m from New Zealand. Unlike many data scientists, I did not grow up doing huge amounts of mathematics, but I think this was probably a little bit of a conscious decision from my parents. When I was five or six years old, I used to stay awake all night under the bed covers with a flashlight, solving math problems . My parents thought, “He’s probably doing more than enough math, so we don’t need to push him on this skill.” As a result, at school, I never really focused on math. Instead I spent a lot more time learning psychology, English, politics and philosophy.</p>

<p>I enrolled in university as a law student, which I really loved. After a few semesters, I also realized that law was a lot of hard work, and it was simply easier for me to get the best grades in math and physics. So after one year of university, I switched out of law and made the decision that I should focus on what I excelled at. I changed my major, but I made a deal with myself that if I didn’t like it after a year of studying, I would go back and become a lawyer. As it turns out, I loved it so much that I went on to get a PhD in Physics.</p>

<p>So while I had a lot of mathematical abilities at a young age, I wasn’t pushed in that direction. Instead, I spent a lot of my time learning about law, philosophy, politics and psychology. I truly believe that it gave me a better perspective on the world, than mathematics alone would have given. Although I didn’t know it at the time, the combination of physics and politics would allow me to make breakthroughs in a field of mathematics that didn’t yet exist.</p>

<p>I immersed myself in the world of physics and loved it. Mostly because it allowed me to ask questions about the world and come up with testable theories to explain it. With physics, you can explain why the sky is blue. It’s fascinating to just be able to do something as simple as that. Once I got in further and started doing nanotechnology and quantum mechanics, I ended up pushing the boundaries of the world we experience. In nanotech, for example, you become obsessed with explaining the very small. The theories you develop start to speak to a world of atoms and electrons. The interactions don’t make sense on a human scale; they’re non-intuitive because you’re not really modeling our human world anymore.</p>

<p>Likewise, in cosmology, the equations you build represent systems on a galactic scale. Again, at the edges of modern physics, you’re modeling worlds that are divorced from the everyday human experience. It’s not really addressing the big questions that we face as humans. Questions like: “Why does the financial market move in a way that allows it to crash massively, while at other times remain stable?” “Why do wars seem to start?” “How do epidemics spread?” “Where do ideas come from and how to they evolve?”</p>

<p>These were the questions about our world that I wanted to answer – and I believed that the tools and techniques from physics and mathematics might have something to contribute.</p>

<p>It wasn’t until I got to Oxford, being very lucky to go on a Rhodes scholarship, that I had the freedom to explore these ideas. I was originally taking my PhD in biomolecular motors, which, like most physics projects, involved a lot of time spent in the lab. After spending a couple of days in the lab, I thought, “I don’t really want to spend the next five years in these rooms.” I went looking around to see if there was a branch of physics that wouldn’t involve time in a lab. As it happens, there was a really interesting professor there who was modeling the dynamics of human interactions, particularly financial markets. I asked him if he would take me on as one of his students, and after a bit of convincing, he said yes.</p>

<p>My supervisor’s name was Neil Johnson. He was a relatively young physicist who was making a name for himself by publishing on a range of different topics, from quantum computers to statistical physics. I worked with him, getting my initial start in the field, by creating models for financial markets. For me, this felt like home.</p>

<p>The first thing I started researching was the dynamics of ensembles of agents. Or, simply put, what happens when a range of intelligent objects start to interact. We used this agent-based modeling approach to start to understand the dynamics of financial markets. Not necessarily to predict where the market was going, but rather, to understand the forces that are shaping and driving it. The work was pretty novel at the time, but it suffered from the limitation that the computer simulations being used to model human behavior could not capture all the intricacies of our human psychology.</p>

<p>This study raised some interesting thoughts. On one hand, there is the issue that we still don’t fully understand the complexities of human decision-making. On the other hand, we’re definitely more predictable than we think we are. What unfolded in the financial world was that humans got out of the market, and algorithms started trading. The algorithms looked exactly like our models. We had created pretty accurate simulations of a market of competing non-human algorithms, along with some warnings about volatility when algorithms dominate a market. This modeling of financial markets led me to my next line of research, and towards modeling the dynamics of insurgency.</p>

<p>War was topical in 2003, as the US had just sent a massive deployment of troops to both Iraq and Afghanistan. In 2003, we also saw the information landscape change as we started to get data sources, like blogs coming online, where reports of violence would be transmitted by many different sources, all of which could be read by machines. So not only could we create virtual models of insurgency, we could tune these models to precisely replicate the statistical signatures of the data that we were collecting in near real time. All of this required building machines that would read news and design algorithms that would extract events from these stories. This was a challenging proposition given the state of Natural Language Processing technology circa 2003. We used a lot of heuristic techniques combined with supervised machine learning models. They performed well enough that we were able to assemble a very complete data set of violent events. We analysed this data set for any statistical patterns and built the agent-based models to describe them.</p>

<p>You’ve got everything from data coming in, looking for signals within the noise, building models to replicate those dynamics, and being quite at the fringe of physics. In the end, my PhD was in physics, modeling the dynamics of insurgency mixed with some algorithms, natural language processing, and political dynamics.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-that-must-have-been-a-fascinating-topic-of-study-in-2003-it-sounds-like-it-was-quite-hard-to-get-the-data-to-actually-conduct-analysis">That must have been a fascinating topic of study. In 2003, it sounds like it was quite hard to get the data to actually conduct analysis.</h5>

<p>You could say that. The data that the U.S. military had was classified and as a foreigner, you weren’t going to get it or even know if they had it to give. It was this restriction that actually drove us to use alternate data sources in the first place. We didn’t think that our open-source data was very good at the time. We thought that the classified data must be much better. It was funny, the first time at the Pentagon, I said, “Look, I’ve got this data, and this what we’re seeing. If you’ve guys have better data, can I have it now?” After a few minutes of talking amongst themselves, they came back to me and simply said, “No. Your data is broadly in line with what we have. You don’t need ours.”  </p>

<p>As it turns out, it wasn’t just broadly in line- it was better! That was just crazy!</p>

<p>The idea that through open source intelligence, you can beat the entire US military’s data collection about significant events in Iraq. When WikiLeaks released the Iraq significant events database, the information was of a lower resolution than the data we had. Data that was already out there and available to the public if you just had the right algorithms to make sense of it. This trend of open-source intelligence dominating closed data collection is one we are observing again and again. We saw it with the financial markets. It used to be, ‘do you know the price and volume of stocks?’ This was the valuable information. Then, price information becomes a commodity. So people switch to making sense of the data with advanced algorithms. You see this transition from data being valuable to algorithms being valuable.</p>

<p>I went through all that. It was a challenging few years. I spent time in Iraq, the Pentagon and the United Nations. I had enough war to last me a lifetime.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-mentioned-spending-time-in-iraq-was-this-during-your-phd">You mentioned spending time in Iraq. Was this during your PhD?</h5>

<p>I wasn’t in Iraq during my PhD. I went in 2008, after my PhD, but the events in the UN and the Pentagon were during my PhD. A lot of it was knocking on doors. I was literally in D.C. stating, “I’ve got this equation- all this useful data.”  I just showed it to a couple of people I knew, who helped get me in touch with some of their connections. Over the course of a week, I had impressed enough contacts that that I ended up in the Pentagon presenting to four-star generals, the intelligence team from US central command, and the Iraqi ambassador to the U.S.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-the-reaction-like-how-did-the-folks-from-the-us-government-respond-to-your-presentation-of-your-research">What was the reaction like? How did the folks from the US government respond to your presentation of your research?</h5>

<p>I expected two or three people to show up, but instead, I was surrounded by 40 people, circling one of those classic war room tables that they have in the Pentagon. Reflecting back, I would have prepared a more polished presentation if I had known exactly the scale of my briefing. There were people who did not fully understand what the data was telling them, and were opposed to the findings. One of the main points of difference was that Pentagon analysts were insistent that there were six groups of insurgents in Iraq. Since I could not make any of the mathematical models work with six groups, they simply stated, “This is not how things are done. You don’t know anything about this space.” My rebuttal was that if they didn’t like this theory, what was their theory to explain this data? They replied, “Our theory wasn’t designed to explain any data,” to which I replied, “How is that even a theory?”</p>

<p>It was as if I was talking to people who spent their whole lives avoiding numbers. They studied political science, and every decision they made along the way was so they didn’t have to deal with mathematics or statistics. But there was the small percentage of those in the room who had spent time on the ground in Iraq, and seen the reality of the situation. When they saw the analysis, they understood what the numbers were saying and they agreed, “this explains a lot of what is going on in Iraq.” The Iraqi ambassador to the US, who luckily had a degree in engineering, was able to see the power of the data driven approach. He said, “It’s like the Wild West out there. There are hundreds of different groups fighting each other. We can’t just sit down and negotiate a truce when the group might not even exist tomorrow. The models you have show this.”</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-did-you-find-any-allies-amongst-those-you-presented-to">Did you find any allies amongst those you presented to?</h5>

<p>Yes. People on the ground: the soldiers and the Iraqi government. Those were two big allies because they had the very real challenge of having to navigate this violence on a day-to-day basis. Many of the officers from West Point asked, “What do I do? What does this mean for me? How do I operationalise this? I’ve got guys on the ground and I don’t want them harmed. What does this mean for getting them home safely?” You go through the dynamics with them; tell them what the basic statistical signatures are showing you, and what the models point to from a strategic perspective. Here is the probability of attack. Here’s how the different insurgent groups coalesce. Here are the signals that suggest a group is starting to break apart, and operationally, they get it.</p>

<p>On the flip side however, many of the Pentagon analysts weren’t moved. They would state, “We’ve got game theory.” I replied, “What does game theory mean when you have hundreds of different groups constantly evolving and the estimated half-life of a group is under 6 months? What does that mean for your game theory?” The insurgents don’t even know what’s going on. How are they supposed to take the rational decisions needed for Game Theoretic models? Game theory is great if you’re in the Cold War and have a good understanding of your one or two enemies, but these guys are 40 years behind. This is a different war.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-just-as-game-theory-emerged-out-of-the-research-from-the-rand-corporation-trying-to-model-the-standoff-in-the-cold-war-are-you-saying-that-complexity-is-the-new-model-for-human-actors-and-chaotic-warfare">Just as game theory emerged out of the research from the RAND corporation trying to model the standoff in the Cold War, are you saying that complexity is the new model for human actors and chaotic warfare?</h5>

<p>That’s exactly right. But they were limited by the restrictive nature of the classified worlds their analyst teams work in. If you were to ask them to look it up on Google, they would tell you, “I can’t open Google. We’ve got an encrypted system. We’ve got to go into that room outside of the building to use Google!” They couldn’t use any data that hadn’t been approved. This limits their view of the world so much so that their analysis becomes dissociated from the activities on the ground.</p>

<p>That said, things are slowly changing. You see General Petraeus moving the thinking of the military towards a more data centric approach. David Kilcullen, an Australian ally, was chief adviser to Petraeus, and they started to become more data oriented. What they were doing with the data was still pretty naïve – but it was a start.</p>

<p>I think it’s changed quite a bit over the last six or seven years, and it’s more accepted that this is the way it’s done. But the first time we submitted our research on the mathematical structure of insurgency to the top scientific journals, they said, “We don’t do politics.” To which we replied, “It’s not politics, it’s mathematics.” Still, they were pretty closed to the idea of publishing this type of research. It took a long time. The academic establishment didn’t want to know about it. The politicians didn’t want to know about it. No one wanted to publish it. Not because it wasn’t any good – but mostly because it didn’t belong anywhere. So you had this new type of academic work that had no home.</p>

<p>In many ways, TED played a pretty instrumental role in getting this research into the public eye. They put me on stage in 2009. At the time, I was only 28. I was the youngest TED speaker from an academic background. Every other academic, who had been on the stage, had a very well established name in their field. Yet here I am presenting this work, I haven’t published, and I’ve just finished my PhD, so everyone is like, “Who is this guy?” I was a nobody with some interesting ideas – nothing more. But that exposure (over 1 million downloads of the lecture) did force people to stand up and take notice. When we submitted the research the second time, the editors at <em>Nature</em> realized that they had to take a closer look at the work. The paper finally went out for peer review and was accepted. Later that year, the research was on the cover of <em>Nature</em>. It was a huge win for our work and for us. But it took three years to get to that place, after many of the world’s journals said they wouldn’t have anything to do with it.</p>

<p>Now, we’ve evolved the theory and so on, but the world also became ready to look at conflict in a way that was quantitative. The lesson is that you can have all the mathematics, you can have all the science, but you also need to bend the world. The world has to be ready, but through telling great stories you can help it get there. The million plus viewers that downloaded the TED Talk, and the attention that it garnered, changed the conversation. It made people everywhere begin to think differently about war and mathematics.</p>

<p>For those six months from the TED talk until the <em>Nature</em> paper was published, I encountered a lot of criticism. <em>Wired</em> magazine put a out a very critical article about my work, saying, “This guy is naive. He’s saying he’s going to make war simple. But he doesn’t know what he is doing,” but they fundamentally didn’t understand the research. At the time, I was surprised by the reaction to the research. I thought that the research would be relatively straightforward, that the reaction would be more positive and open, but there was so much politics surrounding this kind of research, it was always controversial. You can’t expect to analyze an ongoing conflict and not deal with politics. At the time, I guess I saw science and politics as being two different things. Of course, fast forward a few years to today and the research is now widely accepted to the point of being ”obvious.” It’s obvious and accepted that when people kill each other, it is done in a mathematically predictable way that doesn’t seem to be dependent on politics or religion.</p>

<p>I still think that experience taught me a few things. One is, if you really want to change the way the world looks at things, you have to be ready to be the first one through the wall. You have to be ready to get the bloody nose that comes with breaking through entrenched ideas, and know that you’re going to get beat up a little bit. The world won’t accept a new idea without having you fight for it. The second is, that you get to write the story but you also have to be willing to tell the story. The third is, eventually, when the idea does come to be accepted, it will seem so obvious that everyone will forget there was any struggle to start with.</p>

<p>I remember coming out of that time and needing a break from academia. I started applying for jobs, not really knowing what I was looking to do, but wanting to explore some different options. I started looking for jobs in hedge funds, technology companies and the big strategy, consulting firms.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-did-a-stint-at-bcg--a-consulting-firm-right">You did a stint at BCG – a consulting firm, right?</h5>

<p>That’s right. I spent a whole week there at the Chicago office. It was 2009 and during the recession. I felt like I needed a stable job, and I knew I wanted to get out of academia. But after a week I knew that it wasn’t for me and I quit the job to move to San Francisco.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-before-we-move-on-to-the-story-i-want-to-point-out-that-you-didnt-have-the-usual-graduate-school-experience-where-youre-tucked-away-in-basement-number-2-in-building-number-3-and-you-dont-see-anyone-you-were-out-there-trying-to-champion-and-defend-this-new-idea">Before we move on to the story, I want to point out that you didn’t have the usual graduate school experience, where you’re tucked away in basement number 2, in building number 3, and you don’t see anyone. You were out there trying to champion and defend this new idea.</h5>

<p>Yes, and trying to get people to listen. That’s exactly right.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-could-you--expand-on-the-different-ways-in-which-your-graduate-experience-was-different-its-amazing-that-you-had-the-audacity-to-go-to-dc-and-began-knocking-on-doors-when-most-researchers-would-rather-sit-behind-their-papers">Could you  expand on the different ways in which your graduate experience was different? It’s amazing that you had the audacity to go to D.C. and began knocking on doors, when most researchers would rather sit behind their papers.</h5>

<p>In hindsight, I know that I was very lucky in that I managed to choose my supervisor very well. Neil Johnson gave me the freedom to succeed, and I think that was really important. I didn’t have a predefined goal of what I was going to do when I started my PhD. I knew I was going to follow what was interesting to me, and I had the ability to do that. I think that’s really important. You should pivot your research as you progress in your PhD, because in your third year you are simply going to know a whole lot more about what is interesting than you are in your first 6 months. Be open to finding that sidetrack that changes the direction of your path.</p>

<p>You’re in a place, as a PhD student, to be able to think deeply about a problem and comment on things from a pretty unbiased angle. This is a very valuable thing, and something that should be encouraged more.</p>

<p>I think the other piece was the total time I spent in the physics lab department, which would probably turn out to be less than a few days. I didn’t spend a lot of time in the physics department, but instead, I spent a lot of time talking to people in political science. I spent hours with the soldiers that were coming back from Iraq and starting their Master’s in international relations. I spent a lot of time with people with a range of different ideas about how the world worked, and a lot of time reading interesting papers that were outside my discipline; collecting information and ideas from disparate places. I then assimilated this information together to create a new set of theories about war.</p>

<p>There are two very different strategies that I could have used to get my PhD. There was a strategy whereby I could work really hard in the physics lab, plugging away at a niche problem for 5 years and making an incremental gain. Or, I could expose myself to a range of different ideas that no one else from the world of physics was seeing. I could connect the dots better than anyone, and then put a structure on it to make it relevant to the world. That was very much my philosophy. I spent five years of my life asking questions and answering them, and if I’m going to spend that amount of time, the questions should be interesting to me.</p>

<p>Once you’ve taken care of your PhD requirements, you have a lot of freedom as a graduate student - probably more freedom than anywhere. Get out and enjoy that. Be a part of the conversation and seek to answer the things on your mind while always seeking out new things. Take risks!</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-given-everything-youve-just-said-it-actually-seems-like-you-had-a-great-phd-experience-in-contrast-to-other-data-scientists-weve-spoken-with">Given everything you’ve just said, it actually seems like you had a great PhD experience, in contrast to other data scientists we’ve spoken with.</h5>

<p>I loved it!</p>

<p>I ran track a lot; spending three hours a day training for a Decathlon, pole vaulting and hurdling. I think it was really necessary to do that physical exercise because it cleared my head every day. I never went to the track and came back with the work on my mind. If you clear your head every day, it allows you to have fresher thoughts and filters out ideas. Sleep and exercise are two things that we now know removes weaker synaptic connections. As you can imagine, I did a lot of sleeping and running and filtering out all the weak connections that I would make during the day.</p>

<p>To be honest, I think I only did maybe 2 hours of work a day during my PhD. But it was five years of working for 2 hours a day. Everything else, like the conversations, the things outside of your field that you read, the random ideas you stumble across – these filled the rest of the day. You build a life around a space that will expose you to the maximum number of ideas, and you build a pruning system in your life that allows the concrete ones to stay. In that regard, you build a lifestyle, as a PhD, that is less traditional. The other life you can build is to show up at the lab, do your studies, and repeat. That’s a lifestyle that’s pretty well proven, but there’s another, which is the one that’s going to create the new connections between the dots.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-i-think-thats-what-really-excites-us-about-putting-this-book-together-we-feel-like-this-whole-data-science-thing-is-comprised-of-people-like-yourself-who-are-in-the-field-defining-and-fleshing-out-what-it-means-to-bring-analytics-to-industries-that-never-had-analytics-before-and-being-willing-to-fight-that-uphill-battle-despite-your-unique-experience-you-decided-you-didnt-want-to-stay-in-academia-for-the-rest-of-your-life-what-made-you-decide-to-switch-to-this-other-world-that-you-were-creating">I think that’s what really excites us about putting this book together. We feel like this whole data science thing is comprised of people, like yourself, who are in the field defining and fleshing out what it means to bring analytics to industries that never had analytics before, and being willing to fight that uphill battle. Despite your unique experience, you decided you didn’t want to stay in academia for the rest of your life. What made you decide to switch to this other world that you were creating?</h5>

<p>I made that decision before the <em>Nature</em> paper came out. I was frustrated that you couldn’t get the resources from outside to solve the kinds of problems I wanted to solve. I knew we needed to combine teams together from different backgrounds. I knew I needed people with expertise in Natural Language Processing; infrastructure people to store and process large amounts of data. I would have loved to have had more marketing people to help spread the ideas.</p>

<p>There were all these things I knew I needed, and in academia, all I had access to was grad students from the Physics Department. It was too limited. I couldn’t get cross-departmental teams, and I couldn’t run them on the scale I needed. Maybe after tenure I could have run a small team of 5-6 PhDs, but it felt too long to get there, and the team size seemed too small to solve the problems I wanted to solve. Physicists can do a lot of things, but they are not developers who are going to build a real time, self-updating database of Chinese television transcripts with high precision named-entity recognition engines. It was never going to happen. You need a database guru from EMC to build that type of infrastructure for you.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-academia-was-too-constraining">So academia was too constraining?</h5>

<p>It was.</p>

<p>I remember a particular instance in one of my days at the Pentagon. There were a couple of guys from Lockheed Martin who were selling some sort of new radar tracking system. While we were both waiting for our respective meetings, I remember thinking, ‘I’m on the wrong side of this equation. I’m here to give the Pentagon ideas. These guys are here to sell them product. They’re going to get the money to build this – I’m going to have to hope that someone listens to me.’ Somehow, the academics become the people that are the advisors, but the money is spent with the people who are the builders. Everyone asks, “Does your theory work?” and for me, I can tell you that it does, or I can show you it does. Showing is a much better way of doing it. For me, I have to make this thing real. I have to make this theory concrete. I had a real desire to build something that made use of this research.</p>

<p>The building side of it was key, and so I came out here to the Valley. That was a pretty big move. Honestly, I didn’t know anything about business. I didn’t even know what a Series A was. I didn’t know anything about hiring, or legal, or product management and quality code. But despite all of that, I felt as though I was ready to start a tech company.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-i-think-thats-a-good-first-step-youre-starting-at-the-bottom-but-its-all-uphill-from-there">I think that’s a good first step. You’re starting at the bottom, but it’s all uphill from there.</h5>

<p>It was a good first step, but I still had to convince myself that I could start a company and take on this kind of risk. I remember coming out to San Francisco and sitting down with Max Levchin, talking about what it was like to start a company. He told me, “It’s never going to be easier to start a company. You might think it’s hard now and that’s fine- but it will never be easier to start a company than when you’ve come out of graduate school, because you’re living on no money. You’ve got no one to support. If it all goes south in a year, you’re still incredibly employable and you can roll the dice.”  That stuck with me – “It’s never going to be easier,” because in my mind, I thought, “If I can go to McKinsey and learn all about business, when I go back, it’s going to be easier.”  But that’s not the case. It’s never going to be easier to start a company than when you’ve just left grad school.</p>

<p>I think the second step was finding my co-founder, and without him I wouldn’t have been able to make the jump into starting a company. He had been out in the Valley for about four years. He was the first employee of Yelp, and I thought he knew everything about startups and business. Of course, looking back, he didn’t know everything, he just knew more than me, which wasn’t hard, but the things he did understand were vital to our early progress and survival. He was instrumental in helping me build the infrastructure for the ideas and the product that I had. I could not have started the company by myself, nor would I have wanted to. Starting a company is difficult and trying to do that alone is too much responsibility, especially when it is the first company you have started. A co-founder makes it bearable.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-have-been-the-biggest-changes-since-grad-school-i-think-you-skipped-the-part-where-you-tried-to-be-employable-and-you-just-went-straight-to-employing-people">What have been the biggest changes since grad school? I think you skipped the part where you tried to be employable, and you just went straight to employing people.</h5>

<p>Well, I did try to be employable. I went around to the consultancies, and I remember they were quite interested in me. I ended up working at BCG, but I found there was no way for me to apply the kinds of research and theories I had developed to the problems that they were solving. Working at BCG, I felt as though I had lost the talents that made me unique.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-its-like-the-pentagon-all-over-again-except-you-were-going-to-be-a-part-of-the-pentagon">It’s like the Pentagon all over again, except you were going to be a part of the Pentagon!</h5>

<p>That’s right. I was looking at working there; trying to have it make sense for me, but it really didn’t. The ironic thing is that now things have come full circle. We’re selling software to all the major consulting firms like McKinsey, BCG and Bain. BCG and McKinsey now use our software, which is a great result, but at the time, I felt like I was a losing a part of myself by working there. I had worked on all these cutting edge ideas about data, and I was asked to give them up so I could conform to the way things were being done at consulting firms. I did it for a week, and I finally said, “I can’t do this.” It just wasn’t a fit for me.</p>

<p>I remember being at the BCG training program in little country resort just outside of Barcelona. It was a 3-week long immersion course for scientists and lawyers to give them business skills, or the “mini-MBA,” as it was called. It was half way during the first week and I had had a call with one of the senior government officials in Iraq about the escalation of violence over there. The call ended at around 5am in the morning, as such I didn’t get much sleep and I was showing up a half an hour late to the 8am training session in modern accounting practices for strategy, and the Partner running the training was obviously not happy with me. “This is very important that you show up here on time.” Of course, they wanted (and were paying me) to come here and learn important skills for strategy consulting, but that just didn’t seem to be so important as taking the late night phone call from the Iraqi government to discuss IED modelling techniques. At this point I was thinking that I might be in the wrong place. Right then I knew it wasn’t for me and decided to get out at the first opportunity.</p>

<p>I was disappointed. I didn’t want to be at BCG, but I didn’t know where I did belong. I wanted to keep doing this research and push forward the data analysis techniques I had developed, but there wasn’t a place to do it. There was nowhere that would employ me to do what I wanted to do. So, without any other options on the table, I decided that if I wanted to make these ideas real then I would have to create a company myself. I didn’t know exactly how to do this, or what the company would look like, but ultimately I made the jump. I remember the day. It was a Sunday morning, and I was driving back from Los Angeles up the pacific coast highway. Somewhere right around Big Sur it became very clear to me , “I can’t get on the plane tomorrow and fly back to BCG in Chicago.”</p>

<p>I rang them up then and left a voice message, “I can’t go back to work. I’m done.” It was scary to do that, but it was also a rush to cut all the ties. I kept thinking, “I finally get to do this.” That was the transition.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-wow-thats-amazing-so-after-that-point-you-ended-up-creating-quid-can-you-tell-us-about-quid">Wow. That’s amazing. So after that point, you ended up creating Quid. Can you tell us about Quid?</h5>

<p>Sure! I ended up out here in San Francisco in the middle of the recession without a job, without anywhere to stay, with only the last pay check from BCG in my bank account. That was when it all became real. I started to do some contracting work to pay the bills, just talking to companies that I thought had interesting data and they paid me to start playing with it to see if there was any value. At one of these companies, I met my co-founder Bob. He was the CEO of a company with some very interesting data, and I said, “I can help you with that.”  We worked together for a few months, and it was a blast. So I told him, “You have to help me start Quid. We’ve got to start Quid. You have to get out of this company. Quit. You have to come to Quid!”.</p>

<p>So we pitched the idea for Quid to Peter Thiel at a breakfast meeting at his house. He liked it and came in to lead the first round.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-the-pitch-at-the-time-were-you-pitching-a-commercial-version-of-your-research">What was the pitch at the time? Were you pitching a commercial version of your research?</h5>

<p>At the time, I didn’t think my research was commercializable. I thought the military might buy it, but it wasn’t clear that companies would buy the idea of an intelligence platform. No one was banging down our door asking for a platform to allow unstructured data, collected from outside sources, to make their biggest strategic decisions. It didn’t seem like there was an obvious market. Customers wanted the machines to predict what to do next; to push a button and have the computer spit out an answer. But this wasn’t what we were offering. We were saying that we could build an intelligence platform that would combine the best of the human brain with the best of the artificial, computer brain. We didn’t have a name for it then, but today it would be known as augmented intelligence.</p>

<p>We needed a first group of customers who would adopt this new way of making decisions. We needed a group in which the decisions were too difficult for a computer to make by itself and a group in which the biological limitations of the human brain were running up against the increasing complexity of the world. Silicon Valley, in 2010, provided us with just this environment. There were groups of people, working to figure out the right M&amp;A deals to make for big companies, like Microsoft and Google. Their task was almost impossible to do well, simply because of the time it takes to adequately understand an emerging technology space, before the space has changed to the point where your analysis is no longer accurate. This reminded us of the same challenges we had come across in Iraq. Trying to keep track of many small groups (startups), any of which could do damage to a larger dominant force (Google, Microsoft, etc.). It seemed like you could apply these same research techniques, developed to understand insurgents, to the global technology landscape. If you did that, you could make better bets than were currently being made. It could move the market cap of companies by billions and create new winners in the space.</p>

<p>That seemed like the right place to get started. In my mind, I thought, “I want to build this. I want to build a company that remotely monitors the globe and allows analysts to plug in and see structures, like I did in my PhD.” By rolling out this technology to the corporate M&amp;A market, it allowed us to begin the project with a clear business case on which to focus our development.</p>

<p>That’s how we got our start, but in the back of my mind I was always thinking, “I have to hack this venture capital financing structure to do some really cool science fiction stuff. What I really want to do will take a long time, but as I go through this process, I’ll be able to do it. First, I have to make money. Once you make money, you can do anything you want.” This was the hack.</p>

<p>That being said, venture capital is not really set up to do this. For the most part it is easier to arbitrage market opportunities than it is to create science fiction type products. Even if you do get money for this, there’s no guarantee that it is even possible to build the things you are imagining. Looking back now, 2009 was too early for this intelligence platform to exist. There were just too many technology solutions missing from the equation; too many things that we would have to build ourselves. The right time to make this for venture capital would have been at the start of 2012. I think if I wanted to start the company, I should have started in 2012, but the problem would not have been nearly as interesting to work on. This is the issue with venture capital – if you want to really push the limits of what science can do, there just might not be any business applications ready and waiting for you, once you’ve done it.</p>

<p>When things come to market, they are not as interesting as they were five years earlier, and when you live in academia, you’re 10 years ahead of the market. You think a certain thing is possible, and of course, it’s not possible for 10 years. One of the heuristics is that whenever a group of papers are published, it will take 10 years for any academic breakthroughs to become commercial realities.</p>

<p>You learn to appreciate that timeframe. You can’t port your research straight into venture- at least not with the current financial tools that we have. If you’ve finished your PhD, and you can immediately start a company, then your PhD wasn’t any good, because you should be far enough ahead of the world that there isn’t a market for what you’re building. On the flip side, you’re going to be at a place where you’re the first to market, and you’ve already made all the mistakes, and now others can copy your breakthroughs. That’s a difficult place to be. It’s an exciting place, but a difficult place from a business perspective.</p>

<p>In many ways you have to constrain your science aspirations by business realities. We had done this war stuff, and we were going to create a platform to improve private equity investment decisions. It’s not quite revolutionary, but you also have to keep in mind that it is the first step, and venture capital is all about levelling up. If you make the first step, then you move from $2.5M in funding to $10M. Make the next step and you get $50M to play with. You have to keep the grand vision, and at the same time execute on the day-to-day elements of creating product market fit.</p>

<p>My vision with Quid is to have an intelligence platform that monitors the world through open data sources, so that anyone can plug into the platform and see the patterns that shape the world. From that vantage point, everyone can make better decisions in their world that will ultimately impact our world. Users can see further, see deeper, leveraging deep intuitive AI combined with immersive visualizations. To ultimately amplify intelligence through software – that’s where I want to go with this. I want to have a system that makes us smarter, that is distributed as widely as possible, and to as many people as possible.</p>

<p>We’re talking about augmenting human cognition across the planet. I think we’re maybe 10 years away from having a complete working version of this. There’s certainly another billion dollars of investment here. Whether we get there or not, no one knows. But I think something to take away is that with science, you hold a piece of the puzzle, you direct the field, and you get to shape it a little bit.</p>

<p>Here, the traditional thinking is that if you don’t win financially, you haven’t won. But I know that by even being here, I’ve shaped the direction of the technological vector. I will continue to shape it as long as I keep playing. Even if I don’t win the money at end of the game, I’ll do very well, but the direction is going to be shaped because of me. In science, we know that we play a part in a bigger human endeavor and in the Valley its all about me - and did I win.</p>

<p>This is why we need to be in this game, because these things that are happening are shaping all of us, and if it’s just a monetary grab, we’re a little off. Science brings in the aspect of having a sense to do something worthwhile and good.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-in-2006-you-were-working-on-this-paper-and-nature-wasnt-ready-the-pentagon-definitely-wasnt-ready-now-its-almost-10-years-later-and-now-we-see-the-movement-in-industry-towards-making-strategy-decisions-relative-to-your-paper-in-2006-do-you-think-that-within-that-10-year-deadline-were-going-to-get-to-the-place-where-your-vision-is">In 2006, you were working on this paper and <em>Nature</em> wasn’t ready, the Pentagon definitely wasn’t ready. Now, it’s almost 10 years later, and now we see the movement in industry towards making strategy decisions. Relative to your paper in 2006, do you think that within that 10-year deadline, we’re going to get to the place where your vision is?</h5>

<p>The paper came out in 2009, so there’s probably still a few years left before we see commercializations. Based on the work from 2006, we are definitely going to see this in the commercial world. In the last 6 months, since Quid released the second version of our Intelligence Platform, we have seen a great uptake in all types of people using it; from hedge funds, to strategy consultants and advertising creatives. Fast forward another 18 months, I think that we will have thousands of strategy consultants running Quid software. I’m very confident that we’re putting the elements in place to make this happen: the relationships, the technology, and the algorithms. We’re getting our first course at the University College of London’s management science class and the entire class is getting Quid accounts. They’re plugging in. They’re training on it. The first McKinsey teams and the first BCG teams are spinning up. We just signed a major deal with a group of publicists to roll this out to their creative strategists across the entire firm.</p>

<p>We’ve got small, boutique consultancies that are winning massive contracts because they’re running Quid software. They’re getting great results and even moving into new offices based on all the new business they’re winning. Consulting used to be a case where you arbitrage smart PhD students and then you plug them in to BCG. You throw people at the problem. Now, these same people can drive the kinds of software Quid is pioneering. The AI behind the Quid engine can do a lot of the heavy lifting, saving literally, weeks of work. The analysts can spend time doing the things that matter – which is figuring out the implications of the strategy in front of them. Hopefully, if nothing else, I’ve given some of our users a bit of their life back instead of spending it doing those tedious things.</p>

<p>The strategy part of the problem is well on the way towards being solved, and I think the next step is to start integrating more of our Artificial Intelligence capabilities into the system. Scientists talk about the brain having a neural circuitry for intuition. Expert intuition comes from two parts of the brain: the precuneus and the caudate nucleus. The precuneus is the pattern recognition engine that identifies patterns to extract signals, where most of us non-experts would only see noise. I think we’ve built a lot of that in the current release of the Quid platform. We’ve built a lot of pretty good pattern recognition engines, to allow users to see structure in news, science, Twitter etc.</p>

<p>The next phase of the Quid project is to build the AI version of the caudate nucleus. This is the part of the brain associated with the learned response function. I think in the next couple of years, we will have built a good, learned response function into the Quid platform. At the moment, humans are learning the patterns and figuring out what they should do next based on their experience. We can start hinting at things that have happened in the past. That’s not to say that we should replicate them, but we can build on that functionality so they can see what an artificial caudate nucleus would look like on top of these data streams. It’s a kind of simulation that would project the current world forward in time to explore different scenarios. I think that’s going to be really powerful.</p>

<p>I think what the Quid platform ultimately does is allow people that are good at recognizing patterns, and knowing what to do about them, to jump between different areas of expertise. You should be able to jump into the world of material science and see all the papers written in that field, and then jump into the world of swarm robotics for UAVs, and to then into the world of Ukrainian politics. You should be able to leverage the intelligence engines of Quid to give you a deep understanding, across all these fields, in just a few hours.</p>

<p>I think when we put that tool in front of people, they will begin to broaden their knowledge. They will see further and they will see new things. I want to try and replicate the experience I had in grad school, where I was able to jump between things but to give that in a tool to other people, and I think that will change the way people will see the world. I think it will also allow things to be thought and to be built in ways that otherwise wouldn’t have happened. I’m more confident now than ever of getting that right.</p>

<p>A lot of the process, for me, is continuously learning to let go of the things that I have built and let other people in the company take ownership of them. It seems obvious, but it’s a continual process of letting go. You build the first versions and then you have to step back and give it to the other team members. You might not like how they choose to update your solution, but the point is that it’s no longer just yours anymore. The challenge then becomes knowing when to let go and when to step back in to make sure the essential parts of the project are still being maintained.</p>

<p>For example, one of the key features of the product is the animated transition between data spaces. When building this, I was adamant that we had to have transitions. Some other members of the team rightfully challenged this because it’s an expensive part of the product to build. They would ask, “Why do you need transitions?” There’s no real empirical evidence as to why we need this feature, but it somehow just feels right. So I replied, “We’ve got to have transitions. The data has to move between a timeline and a network. People need to orientate themselves”. Other members of the team again objected stating, “No one wants to have that.”  Until I finally stated, “I hear you, but we’re doing it.”</p>

<p>Fast forward a few weeks, and one of the engineers says that a cylindrical coordinate transformation would be better. I said, “You know what? I never thought of that. I’m not sure it does.” Then I looked at it, and they were right; it does. A cylindrical transformation - translating between two points using cylindrical coordinates; I never would have thought of that. I had nothing more to add. Their understanding of this problem was beyond me. That was the right time to let go.</p>

<p>You have things that are important and then at some point, you realize, “I have nothing to add to this.” That’s the continual balance when you create things that are pushing the boundaries of what is possible. It’s important to know what matters and what doesn’t.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-thats-the-beautiful-lesson-in-leadership-it-must-have-been-a-hard-lesson-to-learn-i-feel-like-theres-so-much-investment-involved-not-only-have-you-carried-this-you-also-fought-for-it-for-so-long-and-then-at-the-very-end-you-give-it-away-to-others-torchbearers">That’s the beautiful lesson in leadership. It must have been a hard lesson to learn. I feel like there’s so much investment involved. Not only have you carried this, you also fought for it for so long, and then, at the very end, you give it away to others torchbearers.</h5>

<p>That’s right, and it can only be done with thousands of people building this. It’s fighting the battles that need to be fought and letting go of the ones that don’t. Now, for me, it’s trusting in the machinery that I’ve set up, and it’s also going out and helping the world to learn to use this. With a team, you can keep making the products better.</p>

<p>In life, it’s always 0 to 1, and you’re either a one person or a 1 to 1.1 person. I think a lot of things we do in life are 0 to 1, and that’s also important to recognize. That means that when you’re the first one through the wall, you have to fight for it. No one wants to listen to you, and by the time the idea gets accepted, you’re bored with it. You move on to the next thing.</p>

<p>The nice thing about startups is there’s always a next thing. Everything you do is something you’re doing for the first time and not something you’re very good at. It’s something you’re unqualified to be doing.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-now-at-this-point-in-your-life-i-have-to-say-that-you-have-a-lot-of-credibility-in-doing-things-youre-unqualified-for">Now at this point in your life, I have to say that you have a lot of credibility in doing things you’re unqualified for.</h5>

<p>That’s how you learn about your strength. My strength is consistently doing things I’m not very good at and quickly becoming reasonably competent. My hope for grad students coming out of their PhD is to pick whatever job you want in a way that takes advantage of the skills you have as a graduate student. In data science, if you feel you have to conform too much in a box and don’t get the freedom, that job is not for you. Find a place where you can shape a little bit of the world and keep doing that, which will probably involve doing a lot of things that you’re unqualified for and not very good at.</p>

<p>I think we’ve got a very narrow view of what data science is, which has largely been shaped by data analysts working in the big social networks, like Facebook and Linkedin. So for many of us, data science seems concerned with things like A/B testing to optimize personalized ad recommendations. But data science can be so much more than this. We must recognizing what data can do, what data can’t do, recognizing that it’s messy, that it’s biased, and understanding that it needs a human layer - that it needs stories. Recognizing that it can solve a certain degree of complexity, but it can’t solve any further. Remember that humans have biases and they absolutely need data. We don’t want to move towards naive empiricism – that’s not what data science should be. It’s not what science teaches us, but, at the same time, we don’t need to throw data out the window just because it can’t push a button to solve an equation.</p>

<p>I think a lot of that will come together. Data science will evolve. I think the second piece is data scientists have an obligation to do good things in this world with that data. It’s not enough to just not be evil; it can fundamentally be good. If you come out of science, you are contributing to the world’s knowledge. When you come to the business world, you should also be contributing towards building the tools that help us to live and function in society.</p>

<p>This is an imperative that should be fought for very hard. This should be one of the decisions you make in the jobs that you do. We have a set of technologies that can and will shape our world in ways that are positive and potentially very negative. It ultimately comes down to the mentality of the people that are building the technologies. We can wash our hands and say, “I can’t do anything about it. It’s not in my control.” But we really need to challenge this assumption. You can do something about it! You’re making this or your company is making this stuff. You’re the data scientists that are building this stuff. Of course you can do something about it, and of course you have that responsibility.</p>

<p>If you choose to do it in a different way, you are the one shaping the world. We are the people who are creating this technology, so you can’t just wash your hands and say you’re not part of it. We saw what happened when a bunch of quants on Wall Street, with little regard for the consequences said, “I’m just going to use these algorithms to make money.”  This is not good enough. You can’t arbitrage a system and make money for yourself without also having the responsibility to make it better.</p>

<p>So much of data science has been concerned with equations for the optimization of an existing world. But we need to use data science to build and engineer a better world, and that’s where it starts to move beyond black box predictions and basic statistical tools and moves into design. One of the big things for data scientists is to understand that their role is also one of design. If you create algorithms, you shape the behavior of people who interact with these algorithms. So what kind of behavior are you designing?</p>

<p>I think data science is really going to become more of a product design process; actually an algorithm design process. Algorithms take information and direct us; whether it’s the information we read, the music we listen to, the places we drink coffee, the friends we meet, or the updates in our lives.</p>

<p>You are designing algorithms that fundamentally shape humanity, and we do it in on a population scale in the billions. So how we choose to shape this world certainly has a lot of challenges. We can’t just hide behind the imperative to optimize an algorithm for maximum revenue. You designed an algorithm that created a certain kind of behavior – for better or worse – and now this algorithm is potentially impacting the lives of billions of people you have never met. What kind of behavior do we want? I think you need to fall on the line of making humans more human, making them see further, making them see deeper, making them understand and appreciate the nuance. Don’t try to hide the complexity from them, but instead, make them more conscious. Make them smarter. Help make them smarter. I think that’s what you design for. That’s what you use data science for.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-that-is-amazing-i-love-that-vision-the-imperative-you-stated-for-people-that-want-to-work-in-data-science">That is amazing. I love that vision, the imperative you stated for people that want to work in data science.</h5>

<p>I think most of the data scientists I meet are pretty good people. It’s been refreshing to see this culture emerge from the community that we built up over the years. It’s one of the things we started in 2009, DDG (Data Drinking Group), which was Pete Skomoroch, Mike Driscoll, DJ Patil, Bradford Cross, and me. There were five or six of us that would just get together and drink and talk about this stuff. These were some of the most creative times. The ideas we discussed, the questions we would ask, and the technology we would share. I think this really influenced how the discipline is unfolding today.</p>

<p>Data science is its own philosophy. We’re not the same as the production engineers of the world. We’re not product people. We’re our own kind of group with our own set of values. Data scientists have a distinct kind of DNA that is measurably different from a lot of the other groups. As this culture emerges and develops, I think good things will come from it. I’ve always been very impressed by the data science people I’ve met. They have this nice coupling between the real word and the computer world. They know data and they know engineering. They value the beauty in their algorithms and the beauty in their design. They span a lot of traditional disciplines and can combine their experiences to create new things. I think we’re going to see this group of data scientists solve many of the bigger problems we are facing in the world, and that’s pretty exciting.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
