<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>About The Authors</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-about-the-authors">About The Authors</h2>

<p><a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/carlshan"><strong>Carl Shan</strong></a> is a Data Science for Social Good Fellow in Chicago, where he works with President Obama’s former Chief Scientist on applying machine learning and data science to pressing policy issues. He’s <a href="http://www.carlshan.com">written extensively on his website</a> about his experiences in applying machine learning to social issues. An avid reader, he co-authored The Data Science Handbook to help bring stories and wisdom from pioneering data scientists into the lives of as many readers as possible. When not mired in data, Carl can be found at a pool table, or pretending to know the lyrics of the latest hit pop song. </p>

<p>Carl holds an honors degree in Statistics from UC Berkeley.</p>

<p><a href="https://nz.linkedin.com/in/kiwiboy"><strong>Henry Wang</strong></a> is an investment analyst with New Zealand’s sovereign wealth fund, where he focuses on private investments in alternative energy technologies. He is interested in the intersection of data science and traditional capital intensive industries, where data driven techniques can be used to better inform operational and investment decisions. Henry is a simple guy who enjoys simple things like traveling, reading, and making delicious instant ramen.</p>

<p>Henry holds a Bachelors in Statistics from UC Berkeley.</p>

<p><a href="https://twitter.com/wzchen"><strong>William Chen</strong></a> is a data scientist at Quora, where he helps grow and share the world’s knowledge. He is also an avid writer on <a href="https://www.quora.com/William-Chen-6">Quora</a>, where he answers questions on data science, statistics, machine learning, probability, and more. William co-authored this book to share the stories of data scientists and help others who want to enter the profession. For fun, he enjoys speed-solving Rubik’s cubes, building K’NEX ball machines, and breaking out from “escape rooms”. Check out his recent projects (like <a href="http://www.wzchen.com/probability-cheatsheet/">The Only Probability Cheatsheet You’ll Ever Need</a>) on <a href="http://wzchen.com">his website</a>.</p>

<p>William holds a Bachelors in Statistics and a Masters in Applied Mathematics from Harvard.</p>

<p><a href="https://www.linkedin.com/pub/max-song/28/350/727"><strong>Max Song</strong></a> is a data scientist currently working on secret projects in Paris. Previously, he was the youngest data scientist at DARPA-backed startup <a href="http://ayasdi.com">Ayasdi</a>, where he used topological data analysis and machine learning to build predictive models. He wrote a popular post about <a href="https://medium.com/@pericarus/my-journey-to-data-science-eb79cd454935">his journey to become a data scientist</a> on Medium, and enjoys the craft of writing. He co-authored the Data Science Handbook to share the the wisdom of pioneers for those looking to trailblaze their own data science paths. When not feverishly coding, he can be found playing improv games and seeding an intellectual gathering (<a href="http://onesalon.org">Salon</a>) in far-flung corners of the world. </p>

<p>At the time of writing, he is on leave from Applied Mathematics-Biology at Brown. </p>

<p><a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/bcheng42"><strong>Brittany Cheng</strong></a> is an Associate Product Manager at Yelp who recently <a href="http://officialblog.yelp.com/2015/03/from-keelung-to-kenting-yelps-got-you-covered-with-launch-in-taiwan-.html">launched Yelp in Taiwan</a>! Read her <a href="http://bcheng42.yelp.com">Yelp reviews</a> to see what she’s been eating recently. She created the layout design of The Data Science Handbook and has also worked on layout designs for <a href="http://www.datasciencehandbook.me/#120-interview-questions">120 Data Science Interview Questions</a> and <a href="http://thepmhandbook.com">The Product Manager Handbook</a>. When she isn’t designing handbooks, she likes to eat, talk about eating, drink tea, and rant about umbrellas.</p>

<p>Brittany holds a degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from UC Berkeley.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
