<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Pete Skomoroch</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-pete-skomoroch">Pete Skomoroch</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-former-principle-data-scientist-at-linkedin">Former Principle Data Scientist at LinkedIn</h5>

<p>
  <em>Software is Eating the World, and It’s Replacing it With Data</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Ever since he was young, Pete Skomoroch was interested in science. This led him to double major in mathematics and physics at Brandeis University, where he discovered he enjoyed tinkering with mathematical models and engineering. After graduating, Pete honed his technical skills at Juice Analytics, MIT Lincoln Laboratory and AOL Search.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Pete eventually ended up as a Principal Data Scientist at LinkedIn, where he led teams of Data Scientists focused on Reputation, Inferred Identity and Data Products. He was lead Data Scientist and creator of LinkedIn Skills &amp; Endorsements, one of the fastest growing new products in LinkedIn’s history.</em>
</p>

<p>*He is also the founder of Data Wrangling, which offers consulting services for data mining and predictive analytics. *</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-youre-one-of-the-people-whove-been-around-data-science-since-the-beginning-how-have-you-seen-it-evolve">You’re one of the people who’ve been around data science since the beginning. How have you seen it evolve?</h5>

<p>The creation of the data scientist role was originally intended to address some challenges at large social networks. Many software companies at the time had separate teams. There were production engineers, research scientists writing papers and developing prototypes, and data analysts working with offline data warehouses. The classic R&amp;D model required a lot of overhead as ideas were passed from one team to another to be re-implemented. The latency to get an idea into production and iteratively improve it in this way was too high, especially for startups.</p>

<p>The data scientist role was intended to bridge the gap between theory and practice by having scientists who could write code and collaborate with engineering teams to build new product features and systems. At LinkedIn, we wanted to hire scientists and engineers who could develop products and work with large production datasets, not just hand off prototypes. I think the original concept has evolved over the last few years as organizations found it difficult to hire candidates with the full skill set. Simultaneously, as data science became more popular, it evolved into an umbrella term that describes a large number of very different roles. In my case, I was a Research Engineer at AOL Search and was originally hired as a Research Scientist at LinkedIn before my job title was changed to Data Scientist. In the following years, many business analysts and statisticians also rebranded as data scientists.</p>

<p>Today, depending on the company, a data scientist could be a person who fits that original hybrid scientist-engineer role, or they could be statisticians, business analysts, research scientists, infrastructure engineers, marketers, or data visualization experts. In some organizations, things have come full circle as these skills are held by separate specialized individuals that work together on a data team.</p>

<p>There is nothing wrong with any of these roles and you need all of them for a large modern organization to get the most out of data. That said, I think there is value in having people who fit the original definition, who are interdisciplinary, and can cross boundaries to build new products and platforms. Confusion often arises when companies either don’t know which type of role they need for their organization or which type of data scientist they are interviewing.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-about-your-story-and-how-you-ended-up-where-you-are">Can you talk about your story, and how you ended up where you are?</h5>

<p>I was really interested in science from an early age. When I started at LinkedIn, I was a research scientist, and before that, I had been a research engineer at AOL Search. The flavor of that role was more like the R&amp;D labs that were doing machine learning research and crunching search query data, but there was a strong pull for us to do more production coding involving product.</p>

<p>I remember a talk that Jeff Hammerbacher gave in which he mentioned that what he really wanted on his team was a MacGyver of Data Analysis who could work with data, write code in Java and actually implement the algorithms, do some statistics, and really have a good intuition of what would drive strategic objectives.</p>

<p>I think that was the kernel of the idea that Data Scientist is a different role.  When we are interviewing, we don’t want to select for people who are just business analysts who can’t code, and we don’t want people who are pure engineers who don’t have any science or math background. We want people at that intersection. I think that was really the genesis of data science, it is cross-disciplinary.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-some-of-your-undergrad-research-was-about-neuroscience-can-you-tell-us-a-bit-more-about-that">Some of your undergrad research was about neuroscience, can you tell us a bit more about that?</h5>

<p>I was really interested in neuroscience, and physics and electronics. When I went to Brandeis, I found that I actually liked mathematical modeling, data crunching, cracking codes, building models and programming versus doing lots of bio lab work. I felt my real aptitude was digging into the data and coming up with theoretical models, which is what drew me to physics.</p>

<p>I graduated college in 2000 while the dotcom boom was still happening. My family was just scraping by financially, so it was really compelling for me to go into industry although I ultimately planned to go back to grad school. I had used Matlab, Mathematica, some C, and Assembly in physics classes and learned Visual Basic in an internship, but I wasn’t a strong programmer at that point. In retrospect, that is one thing I would have done differently in undergrad. If I had taken more computer science classes, I probably would have ramped up faster at startups.</p>

<p>When giving advice on undergraduate coursework, I’d echo Yann Lecun, who is now heading AI Research at Facebook and did pioneering work in neural networks. I agree with his advice to take as many physics and math classes as you can, but also learn some computer science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-computer-science-play-into-your-post-college-job">How did computer science play into your post-college job?</h5>

<p>A big piece of what a data scientist is really doing is creating models. It’s not just about taking data and loading into a black box machine learning algorithm and running it, but actually modeling something about an organization, a company or a product. It’s difficult to find the underlying factors and phenomena that are really predictive and prescriptive vs. something that is just a correlation.</p>

<p>So, when I was looking at jobs coming out of college in 2000, I interviewed at a few places, and one that looked really interesting was a small startup in Kendall Square called Technology Strategy Inc., which eventually rebranded as ProfitLogic, Inc. Our early clients included casinos and some of my coworkers were working on interesting projects optimizing slot machines or spotting cheaters. In the early days we did a lot of consulting work and as it turned out there was a lot of interest from fashion retailers, who wanted things like better inventory allocation and markdown price optimization.</p>

<p>What we were doing was essentially an early version of data science. We would get tapes delivered weekly from big retailers like Macy’s or JC Penny or Walmart, and the data would be loaded into our own data warehouses. Then we would run statistical models using a combination of C++ and Python to adjust prices and build predictive sales forecasts at the item level. The ultimate idea was that you could save a lot of time and maximize profit by automatically setting prices using a data driven approach. By taking these optimal price trajectories instead of relying only on intuition, you could make more profit and get more inventory through the system.</p>

<p>My initial role there was similar to a grad student in a research lab. Eventually, I became a hybrid product manager and engineer on the data and algorithm side. I would often be in the office all night, making sure that the weekly model run was working, scrutinizing thousands of charts and logs for model issues. Over time, I started to see areas for improvement and develop my own algorithms for seasonality and other forecast improvements. I was working with people across the engineering teams, the database team and research scientists. That’s where I first encountered this pain point of bridging between those areas.</p>

<p>In my case, what I found was that I needed to build up my programming and computer science skills to become more self sufficient. I started out as an analyst building models and then moved into the software engineering organization.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-you-get-good-at-these-things-did-you-take-your-own-time-to-learn-or-is-it-more-like-you-just-embedded-yourself-within-the-groups-at-the-company-that-you-were-doing-these-things-at">How did you get good at these things? Did you take your own time to learn, or is it more like you just embedded yourself within the groups at the company that you were doing these things at?</h5>

<p>I think the only way to excel is to take the extra time. I would go home and read every O’Reilly book I could get my hands on, working through textbooks and side projects. I would do what I could to learn at work, and I was always pushing to work on areas beyond what I was doing before. I’d advise people to take the time to level up early on in their careers, maybe sleep a couple hours less while you can handle it.  </p>

<p>As I was reading and building models, it seemed like machine learning was a better answer than heuristics or other approaches commonly used in forecast models. I was learning that on my own, but I felt like the only way to level up was to do real coursework and be around people who were actually doing it. There was a job opportunity at MIT’s Lincoln Lab working in biodefense, and a big benefit for me was that I could also take graduate courses in that role. I took a fantastic neural networks course with Sebastian Seung, the author of <em>Connectome</em>, and a machine learning course with Leslie Kaelbling, along with some math courses and an optimization theory course.</p>

<p>My story during that time period is a bit of an unusual one. I would often wake up, go to work in Lexington, go to the MIT library, stay up all night eating from the vending machines and working on problem sets, and go back to work the next day without sleeping. Then I would go home and crash, and then I would repeat that process. I was a zombie for a couple of years and if I could do anything differently, I would balance that much better. Yes, you have to put in your time, but try to balance it. Staying up all night coding is the same thing. Sometimes you maybe have to do it but if you’re doing it all the time, you are eventually going to burn out and you are nowhere near as effective as you think you are.</p>

<p>That said, I don’t want to make it seem like there is a magic path through this. To get to the point where you can gain the right skills this field does take a lot of hard work and I wouldn’t minimize that.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-the-amount-of-stuff-you-have-done-is-unbelievable-i-think-telling-the-story-of-how-hard-everything-was-its-not-that-you-had-everything-handed-to-you-that-is-criticalin-communicating-how-peoplethink">The amount of stuff you have done is unbelievable. I think telling the story of how hard everything was, it’s not that you had everything handed to you. That is criticalin communicating how peoplethink.</h5>

<p>I think there are two parts. Being smart only gets you so far. You have to work hard because anything worth doing is worth doing well and you’re better off just digging in. There is this psychological factor of grit that is important.</p>

<p>That is what I would encourage people to think about. Stretch yourself, because if you only work on things that you know well, you’re going to plateau. That is part of what makes doing a new startup so appealing. If you go into management, I advise not giving up coding completely. Own a feature or something that keeps you in the loop, so that you’re up to speed with the development tools, the build process, the code base, the latest tricks and languages. All these things are important because the further you get from the nuts and bolts, the harder it is to make intelligent decisions. The technology changes rapidly, especially in data science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-about-your-experience-at-lincoln-lab-what-was-it-like-especially-as-you-were-moving-there-from-the-private-sector">Can you talk about your experience at Lincoln Lab? What was it like, especially as you were moving there from the private sector?</h5>

<p>There was a mixture of biologists, physicists, hardware engineers and software engineers. I’ve always been drawn to the intersection of fields.  One project involved a machine learned model for a biosensor. It started as a simple threshold alarm algorithm, and I took it a step further to mathematically model the biochemical processes statistically and apply machine learning on top of that parameterized model.</p>

<p>Anyway, I thought it was interesting that machine learning doesn’t just have to be a black box. You can get better results if you have a more intuitive sense or physical sense of what you are modeling and build those features into the model. Often, a custom model is what you need to really nail it. On the other hand, if the answer only has to be 80% accurate, you may want to do something more lightweight.</p>

<p>Afterwards, I moved to DC while my wife was in grad school, but after a few years in defense I wanted to try a job in consumer internet.  The most interesting role around DC in terms of machine learning at the time was at AOL Search. The experience working with large datasets at MIT helped me land a role on a great team there mining search query data, and many of my coworkers from that team went on to work at Twitter via the Summize acquisition. There were a lot of management changes at AOL during that time, and I did my best to adapt while things were uncertain, installing an early Hadoop cluster there and experimenting with mapreduce techniques.</p>

<p>There were all these interesting things developing around the same time in the startup world, including the early development of Amazon EC2 and Hadoop, and so I viewed that lack of direction as an opportunity. AOL was very much a content company and I wanted to look at how they could do better in terms of content based on data: Based on search data, what can we decipher about what people are actually interested in, what’s trending? And so the first step is to assess, how are you doing versus your competitors? AOL grew through acquisitions, so it wasn’t like everything was on a central system.  I actually had to crawl internal AOL properties and external sites as well.</p>

<p>Externally, there were signs that data was going to be a big deal, but internally they were dismantling the R&amp;D team, so I knew that wasn’t a good place to stay. Another company that I had been talking to in the area was called Juice Analytics. They were primarily known for data visualization, but it was an appealing opportunity to me because I could apply this intersection of skills I’d been developing to product development. So I joined Juice, and we built and shipped a SaaS software product built on Django and EC2. It took about a year, and we were crunching search queries and doing some clustering and pattern recognition to come up with a better picture of your site’s search topics instead of just the top ten queries or whatever you got at the time in Google Analytics. That was a great experience of end-to-end product development.  </p>

<p>Ultimately, I think it was a failure in terms of product-market fit, but I learned a lot from that process. As a data scientist in an engineering driven company, you probably go through engineering boot camp, get up to speed with the tech stack, and then you can actually do some engineering to solve your own data problems. When you think about it, that’s the way you get leverage in the world that we live in now.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-do-you-mean-when-you-talk-about-leverage">What do you mean when you talk about leverage?</h5>

<p>Imagine you have an idea on how to improve your company’s product. Say you come in and say, I have this great idea. Everybody will love it and it will make billions of dollars and improve the lives of millions of people. But if you are just describing the idea and you can’t implement at least some rough version of it, you are at a disadvantage. That’s why I think one of the highest leverage things you can do right now is gain some engineering and computer science skills.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-how-did-you-move-from-lincoln-lab-to-silicon-valley">So how did you move from Lincoln Lab to Silicon Valley?</h5>

<p>After the experience at ProfitLogic, I was bit by the startup bug and ultimately planned to move out to California. After my wife completed her master’s in 2009, we said okay, we’re just going out there. The previous year in DC, I became increasingly active on Twitter and I found it really fantastic for finding people with similar interests, especially when you were outside the Bay Area. For data, one of the key people I met was named Mike Driscoll. He’s the CEO at Metamarkets, but at the time he had a blog called Dataspora and he did data-related consulting. We contemplated doing an O’Reilly book back then called <em>Big Data Power Tools</em> to a) survey these different tools that you should know and b) offer case studies with tips and tricks for practitioners. My vision was that you would hand that book to a new hire and just have them read through it and be ready to hit the ground running. Fast forward to today, and it’s really great to see that this is actually happening through a variety of courses, textbooks, meetups and data science bootcamps like the Insight Data Science Fellows program.</p>

<p>I think that now a lot of large Fortune 500 companies see the success of consumer internet companies like Google, Facebook, Twitter, Amazon, etc., and they say, “I’m not sure what they are doing, but it seems to be working. I want that. How do I innovate and build products like that?” I think there is a bit of a misconception out there that building dashboards of business metrics like Google will turn you into Google, when really it was a huge amount of engineering infrastructure and algorithmic product development that got them to where they are today. I think a lot of the people who want to get into data science say, “That is really amazing, how does Google know everything?”.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-or-perhaps-how-does-target-know-im-pregnant">Or, perhaps “How does Target know I’m pregnant?”</h5>

<p>That’s a darker version of that question, but even there it’s interesting to note that the algorithms were really just detecting people following instructions from other software systems. If you are pregnant, there are tons of websites and medical guides that tell you exactly what to purchase and which vitamins to take each week. When you know that, it’s not so surprising that such regimented purchase patterns are detectable.</p>

<p>That said, a lot of data science does seem like magic. How do they create these magical experiences? Even Uber seems like magic (I know that isn’t all necessarily data science), but there is something impressive about getting the cars there fast enough when you push a button that it feels like magic. Fortune 500 companies and big organizations want that magic. And they have some sense that it is happening through data, but they’re not quite sure how. I wasn’t sure either when I started in the field, but it was just clear to me that we were just scratching the surface of what we can do involving engineering and data.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-sort-of-opportunities-did-you-find-at-linkedin-that-took-advantage-of-your-quantitative-background">What sort of opportunities did you find at LinkedIn that took advantage of your quantitative background?</h5>

<p>The younger a company is, the easier it is to propose new things. When I started working there, LinkedIn had some structured data around titles and companies and company pages, but they didn’t really have any notion of topics or skills. I had just done a bunch of Wikipedia topic mining to build a site called trendingtopics.org, and I thought, with all of these member profiles, I should be able to do some topic mining of the skills that people have. And then I’ll have that structured data set. I thought you should be able to tag people like websites in del.icio.us (which I was a big fan of) and then we would have all this rich data to do better recommendations and matching.</p>

<p>I made a quick proposal to my manager DJ Patil, and I got a time window of six to seven weeks to crank out a prototype. This was back in 2009 and at first, I didn’t think that LinkedIn would have enough data in the connection graph to say how good somebody was at something. But even in early versions, there was a lot of signal in the data and the project was green lighted based on that prototype. At that point, my picture of where this thing was going evolved and I thought that the ultimate value was going to be in the reputation data tied to each skill.</p>

<p>What ultimately led to further enhancements like endorsements was the overarching goal to develop products that fulfilled strategic goals to get people back on the site, grow engagement, grow profile data, and help improve job matching, ad matching, and other algorithms. The ultimate goal for me was to add a layer of links anchored by skills across profiles, and do for the social and professional graph what Google had done for web pages, allowing people to find and by found.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-more-about-what-its-like-developing-new-features-or-products-at-larger-established-companies-versus-the-startups-youve-worked-at-in-the-past">Can you talk more about what it’s like developing new features or products at larger established companies, versus the startups you’ve worked at in the past?</h5>

<p>There was a formal process to bringing new ideas to production at LinkedIn because there may be a big difference between the technologies you used to prototype your idea, and those that LinkedIn is built with. The same thing likely applies for any big tech company at this point. You have to get projects approved and they have to get a budget because you need specialized people on the projects in different organizations: web designers, web developers, frontend engineers, ops people. It takes more of cross-team village to build a product versus a startup where you are a small group wearing a bunch of different hats doing a bunch of different things.</p>

<p>The spirit at the time during when we built the first version of skills was still that we would try to wear many hats. That said, we wanted to ship product quickly and the way to get that done is to get the right resources lined up so you can really execute. I think one of the worst things you can do is sign up for a project when you know you are not set up for success and you are not resourced properly.</p>

<p>Another important reality to face is that you need to hit product-market fit. You could have a very smart idea as a data scientist, but there is more to succeeding than just having a smart idea.  One common problem is that the idea might not align with the company objectives. Another is that many startups that just fail because they are a technology in search of a problem. When you hear there is a shortage of data scientists, I actually believe the most difficult people to find are those that have a more human, intuitive sense of the customer and knack for getting to product-market fit.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-develop-this-intuition-for-product-market-fit">How do you develop this “intuition” for product-market fit?</h5>

<p>When I interview people, it often manifests itself in somebody who is driven and who has done some novel, creative side projects. When you are building stuff on your own, you often see that your original idea doesn’t actually have enough thought put into it. I also like to see when people have worked either in different disciplines or in different areas of domain expertise. An example of a concrete question that would come up in an interview to test for this intuition would be: “If you had access to all of our data, what would you do?”</p>

<p>I think that rather than going from the bottom up and thinking, “What is something cool I can do with this data?” it is sometimes a better approach to think strategically from the top down. “What are the top priorities for this company and what are we going after? What technology or product trends are opening up new opportunities? Who are our customers? What is the market, and how could I do this differently with data?”</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-this-seems-to-capture-the-sentiment-expressed-by-steve-jobs-when-he-said-people-think-focus-means-saying-yes-to-the-thing-youve-got-to-focus-on-but-thats-not-what-it-means-at-all-it-means-saying-no-to-the-hundred-other-good-ideas-that-there-are">This seems to capture the sentiment expressed by Steve Jobs when he said, “People think focus means saying yes to the thing you’ve got to focus on. But that’s not what it means at all. It means saying no to the hundred other good ideas that there are.”</h5>

<p>Right, and the same thing goes for managing a data team. In the same way, when you’re staffing or building a product, think about how well it matches the priorities of the company. LinkedIn could do a million different things, but you want to focus on things that actually align with the strategic goals of the company. There are many things that would align with the vision, but that doesn’t mean it’s the right thing to do. So you need to prioritize, and you need to do it in the context of all the other things you could possibly do.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-sounds-like-a-great-deal-of-understanding-the-ins-and-outs-of-data-science-is-learning-how-to-focus">It sounds like a great deal of understanding the ins-and-outs of data science is learning how to focus.</h5>

<p>Yes. It may not take seven years of focus like a PhD, but you probably need at least a year to do anything of really significant value. If you are coming out of school and you want to work on a data team, you need to find good mentors. You need people who are training you up on the engineering stack, who are sharing the common tools, and helping push projects through management layers. I hear a lot of complaints where lone data scientists feel like they have no support structure. It is really hard to operate without a team on your side, because I think the personality type of scientists is often not the most assertive when dealing with business stakeholders.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-more-about-the-growing-importance-of-data-science-within-companies">Can you talk more about the growing importance of data science within companies?</h5>

<p>I think data teams are building really important things. They are actually going about it in a very deliberate way and they’re using reason, theory and evidence. People from science backgrounds are well suited for this, because you’re building up a theory of what you think will happen if you were to make certain changes to the product. I think that that is really at the core of the skillset that you want in engineering product development and data science to make informed decisions.</p>

<p>I think that data science is going to become this discipline that drives decision-making and product development. In order for data to have the biggest impact, it needs to be in the early phases of product development rather than just added as an afterthought.</p>

<p>It also involves giving feedback to the product and engineering team about the quality, type and quantity of data that will be collected and affected given certain product decisions. It’s incredibly important to have someone sitting in the room and advocating for the data team every time a new product feature is proposed. That may be easier if data science itself rolls up within the engineering or product organization, or has an advocate reporting to the CEO like a Chief Scientist or Chief Data Officer.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-of-the-people-we-have-talked-to-you-can-offer-a-unique-perspective-on-how-to-effectively-manage-a-data-science-team-because-you-are-so-engineering-focused-as-well-there-are-a-lot-of-managers-who-are-very-people-focused-or-they-sort-of-try-to-massage-the-politics-of-the-company-to-get-things-done-but-you-seem-to-want-to-stick-very-closely-to-the-nuts-and-bolts-of-a-company-so-what-do-you-find-to-be-effective-in-creating-a-data-science-team">Of the people we have talked to, you can offer a unique perspective on how to effectively manage a data science team because you are so engineering focused as well. There are a lot of managers who are very people focused or they sort of try to massage the politics of the company to get things done, but you seem to want to stick very closely to the nuts and bolts of a company. So what do you find to be effective in creating a data science team?</h5>

<p>Jeff Weiner had this framework for prioritizing decisions around vision, strategy, mission and objectives. He used it as a leadership framework and a way to rally people behind a vision. Of the things that I think an effective engineering manager needs to have, one of them is expertise. If you don’t understand what the people on your team are doing, you’re going to have a hard time making the right calls. Beyond that, you need to be an advocate for what is right for the company and by proxy what’s right for your team.</p>

<p>A good leader for a data science team understands some data science, has some vision to see what the right path is, brings the right people in, gets the resources, and then gets out of the way and gets other people out of their way. If your team is being thrashed around and pulled in different directions, it will be hard to stay focused.</p>

<p>There’s a great talk by an MIT professor named Fred Kofman who has a book on business strategy called <em>Conscious Business</em>. He says when most people are asked what their job is, they reply with their job title. But that’s a very limited way to think about the role you play within a team or company. If you use the analogy of a soccer team, the various players all may have different roles. For example, as the goalie your job is to simply stop the ball. As an attacker your goal is to score the most number of points. But if you are completely optimizing for these local metrics, your team still might not win! So I think that what can really make teams successful is everyone really believes in what they’re doing, believes in the mission and feels like they’re enabled to accomplish that.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-your-perspective-change-throughout-your-own-life">How did your perspective change throughout your own life?</h5>

<p>Earlier in my career, I thought what was blocking me from more success was not having the engineering skills. Over time, as LinkedIn went from 300 to 5000 employees, what’s often difficult for organizations at that scale is communication and coordination issues. What I often would see blocking people was of that nature. It was less pure engineering ability, and more: “How do you get stuff to ship? How do you get resources? How do you get priority?” If I were given total freedom, I would actually just enjoy building stuff and building algorithms, but when you want to maximize impact and success at the company, I think more of what was blocking me at that stage was having to navigate structure within the company.</p>

<p>My two cents of advice on that would be engineering, engineering, engineering. Because in that environment, or at Facebook or Google, optimizing and getting that right is really going to enable you much more than other alternatives.In a larger company, you’re always going to have challenges of organization and your throughput isn’t going to be as high by definition. That’s why startups exist.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-i-really-like-what-you-said-about-the-fact-that-even-if-you-wanted-to-build-build-build-it-would-be-more-effective-for-a-team-to-unblock-their-processes-that-tied-in-very-closely-with-the-analogy-you-have-with-soccer-players-some-soccer-players-want-the-personal-glory-but-the-best-soccer-players-are-the-one-who-realize-its-the-team-winning-that-is-more-important-than-fulfilling-their-own-goals">I really like what you said about the fact that even if you wanted to build, build, build, it would be more effective for a team to unblock their processes. That tied in very closely with the analogy you have with soccer players. Some soccer players want the personal glory but the best soccer players are the one who realize it’s the team winning that is more important than fulfilling their own goals.</h5>

<p>I think it’s a balancing act, and I would add one other thing. My opinion has been the best way to show the way is just to do good work. But it’s not enough to just do good work; you also have to talk about it. That’s something else you can pull from science because a big part of science is communicating. There’s value in that, both from a recruiting respective, but also for training the next generation. I think that’s the way we build and weave on top of each other’s experiences, it’s all connected. I would balance talking about your projects with building. I would say work hard, work for a long time, and then talk about what you did and go on to the next step.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-given-all-of-your-experience-and-perspective-what-do-you-think-is-going-to-be-the-future-of-how-data-is-used-in-the-world">Given all of your experience and perspective, what do you think is going to be the future of how data is used in the world?</h5>

<p>Four to five years ago, I think investors were a good proxy for the future. They might not come up with all the ideas, but they hear a lot about what people think and are cued into where things are headed. It was very early for the data space and people were building low-level backend technologies. Over time, interest started to shift to what gets built on top of these backend technologies.</p>

<p>I think what people are really thinking about now is how to replicate the Google and Netflix approach and map it onto the rest of the world. There is a much bigger wave coming of building tools and applications on top of all of this data and infrastructure. There now exist data companies in oil &amp; gas, and health care and other areas, taking on sorts of different verticals.</p>

<p>I’m looking forward to seeing a set of data companies like this. I think all the data companies that are building better platforms and better tools are making everyone’s life easier and I want to see more of that, but I also want to see more industries disrupted in a way where it makes society more efficient and people’s lives better.</p>

<p>I think the other wave we’re hitting is that of social data. All the social data that is being generated is really instrumenting the world and people’s behaviors in an entirely new way. Everyone has a Facebook account, a LinkedIn account or a Twitter account, which provides immediate context about the person. We’re never lived in a time where there’s so much context about you readily available to make your daily experience better. The other key component of this is that we all have mobile computers in our pockets, generating all this ambient data.</p>

<p>We’re going to see more smart software at the intersection of those two trends. For example, why does it take four hours to book a flight right now? There are all these workflows, suboptimal systems, and paperwork which could be much easier using mobile and social data. In movies like <em>Her,</em> you are starting to see where the rise of Google Now, Siri and things like that could be headed. One thing I think is really interesting is this entire field of intelligent systems. That’s a common thread in things I’ve worked on.</p>

<p>I think that having these techniques and this intelligence in that sea of data acting on your behalf is the next stage. You have context, you have alerting, you have all these disaggregated unbundled verticals like Pandora, but I think next you’re going to see this really cool future where you’re going to express a desire and intent and something else is going to make it happen. I think that’s what I’m most excited about, and why I think for data scientists, the world is your oyster.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
