<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Luis Sanchez</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-luis-sanchez">Luis Sanchez</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-founder--data-scientist-at-ttwick">Founder &amp; Data Scientist at ttwick</h5>

<p>
  <em>Academia, Quantitative Finance and Entrepreneurship as a Data Scientist</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Luis trained as a civil engineer in Venezuela before arriving in the US for his MBA on a Fulbright in the early 90s. Though he aspired to join the World Bank, Luis found an alternative application of his data skills in the world of finance.</em>
</p>

<p><em>After an illustrious career as a quant at AIG and Deutsche Bank, Luis found himself structuring exotic asset backed and catastrophe linked securities at Lehman Brothers (you can see his video <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srvU4tpqkWc">here</a></em>), where he worked till the firm’s bankruptcy on September 15, 2008. With plenty of free time on his hands, he dabbled in cross pollinating the ideas from his structuring days to areas of social media.*</p>

<p>
  <em>He is the founder of and data scientist at ttwick, a search engine for social media content.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-where-do-you-work">Where do you work?</h5>

<p>I am the CEO and Data Scientist of ttwick Inc, a data analytics startup with roots on Wall Street.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-your-personal-career-path-like">What was your personal career path like?</h5>

<p>I started my analytical career as a Civil Engineer specializing in structural engineering, hydraulics and numerical analysis with a degree from a military university in Venezuela in 1987. I also obtained a specialization in systems analysis and programming from another Venezuelan institution, but it was the combination of engineering and programming that put me in the right frame of mind and gave me the skills to eventually evolve into a data scientist.</p>

<p>In 1990, I decided to move to Washington, D.C. and begin studying for my MBA on a LASPAU scholarship (a Fulbright scholarship for Foreign Students). My goal at that time was to get accepted into the World Bank’s Young Professionals Program and work in global  infrastructure development. I dreamed about all the data I would have access to at the World Bank, to play with and analyze.</p>

<p>Back in 1990, it was not easy to get enough data to analyze, and I used to spend a lot of hours in the computer lab with my newly issued email address and Internet access. I started to gather as much data as I could via Gopher, Archie (the first search engine for FTP archives), or whatever I could get my hands on. I then discovered the University of Chicago’s CRSP database, which had some securities data available in a monthly format. In the summer of 1991, I got a 2400 bps modem, which allowed me to access the CRSP databases from my IBM PS/2 at home, and finally, I did not have to spend so much time in the computer lab, which always annoyed Gabrielle, my girlfriend at the time. In 1991, it was difficult to obtain large volumes of high-quality data, so I started to explore other methods such as creating synthetic data via Monte Carlo simulation, which kept some of the features of the original data set. Because of that, I started to do a lot of research in computer science.</p>

<p>I never got the job I wanted with the World Bank, but after graduating in 1993 I started working for a New York-based hedge fund that wanted a quant for its newly established Quantitative Analysis department, to complement the work of analysts doing pure fundamental analysis on securities.</p>

<p>By the way, I ended up proposing to Gabrielle, believe it or not, after writing a program based on professor Thomas Saaty’s Analytical Network Process. I thought his multiple-criteria decision algorithms would help me make sure I did not have any inconsistencies in my logic. (Years later, Gabrielle got kind of upset when she learned I based my proposal decision on an algorithm.)</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-your-responsibilities-at-ttwick">What are your responsibilities at ttwick?</h5>

<p>I found out a lot of the market-based algorithms for allocation of resources I developed and used in finance could also be used to search and organize unstructured data on the web; to determine if an online ad should be launched today or in a few days; to create real-time portfolios of content at low cost; to dynamically calculate probabilities of reaching certain audiences, etc. These algorithms coupled with natural language processing, data augmentation, and other techniques  could be used for many applications, including the discovery of arbitrage opportunities in certain financial markets, forecasting of political events, etc.</p>

<p>As CEO and Data Scientist, I am developing a series of B2B and B2C products and consulting services  based on the above-mentioned applications, some of which are currently being used and/or tested by hedge funds, advertising agencies and other institutions.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-is-data-science-to-you">What is data science to you?</h5>

<p>To me, data science is the art and science of extracting actionable intelligence from sets of data, big or small.</p>

<p>I call it “art” because there is not really a one-size-fits-all technique that can help you answer the questions you want to ask your data. You need to be creative and have imagination to see what others don’t see in the data. If you are anything like me, the best solution to your most challenging problems has come to you when you least expected it, in the form of an inspiration. When that happens, I get in the zone and the solution just comes to me, and I can’t focus on anything else.</p>

<p>I call it “science” because you need to know the theory behind what you do and put in your 10,000 hours of problem-solving so you develop “muscle memory” so to speak, and you acquire the right foundation to become a good data scientist.</p>

<p>One thing I believe but don’t know if other people would agree with: Good data science can’t be 100% theoretical or 100% practical. There has to be a mix.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-in-your-opinion-what-is-the-goal-and-purpose-of-a-data-scientist">So, in your opinion, what is the goal and purpose of a data scientist?</h5>

<p>The purpose of a DS is to extract actionable intelligence from sets of data with the most efficient use of resources and under time constraints. The DS should be able to connect data together in meaningful ways, to create new knowledge from the combination of data, to be able to analogize and solve problems in creative ways, and to do all that quickly. Like General Patton used to say:* “A good solution applied with vigor now is better than a perfect solution applied ten minutes later.”*</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-some-past-projects-you-have-worked-on">What are some past projects you have worked on?</h5>

<p>As a financial quant, I worked on many interesting projects, many of them being the first ever of their kind. Many of the projects on which I worked set the foundations for niche markets within structured finance and trading.</p>

<p>Some of the most interesting deals were:</p>

<ul><li>First sovereign catastrophic (CAT) bond: Using a parametric structure, I designed an ABS structure that covered the Government of Mexico against the effects of an earthquake. The bond was rated and successfully launched to market.</li>
  <li>Weather options: one of the most fascinating projects during my time at AIG, where I was in charge of developing a model to price the risk of extreme rainfall or temperature in several cities across the world. This topic is extensive, but developing the mechanism for a new market and seeing it grow and find participants that included energy companies, theme parks, airlines, etc., was a fascinating experience.</li>
  <li>Music and film royalties: Have you heard of Bowie Bonds (as in David Bowie)? Basically, the same idea was involved in deals I was pitching while at Deutsche Bank for some high profile artists. After I left in 2005, I retrofitted my own model to value film productions yet to be made, and all of a sudden, I found myself giving speeches at Hollywood events about the use of Monte Carlo Simulations and Bayesian analysis to price film productions.</li>
</ul><p>More recently, as a DS, I demonstrated to a hedge fund that there is a way to gain an edge in the market via non-conventional financial analysis, using non-conventional sources of data and machine learning tools such as those I am developing at ttwick. This sort of analysis, coupled with the right financial derivatives, could generate superior alpha returns in various market environments.  </p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-your-experience-like-transitioning-from-academia-to-industry-data-science">What was your experience like transitioning from academia to industry data science?</h5>

<p>The experience was effortless, with a dash of good timing. As I mentioned before, I was applying the math and coding skills I had acquired as an engineer to solve problems presented as part of the curriculum of my MBA. I found it interesting that only a few of my classmates had any coding skills, so I became the “class quant.” Classmates came to me for help with assignments for classes such as Strategic Marketing, where data science could be applied to solve marketing problems. By helping them, I also gained exposure to their areas of concentration.</p>

<p>I started to write code for small projects with demos of things for marketing, financial trading, etc., and towards the end of my MBA, I started to attend specialized seminars in New York that concentrated on real-life problems about trading non-liquid securities, correlation trades, technical analysis, etc.</p>

<p>Over several of these seminars, I started to see a core group of people attending the most interesting ones, whom I later learned were investment managers looking to expand their knowledge of the markets, while at the same time scouting talent for their own hedge funds. I met Marc Chaikin, a famous technical analyst who created one of the first platforms for real-time technical and fundamental analysis of securities, with a huge database of tick-by-tick data.</p>

<p>Eventually, I ended up working for Marc’s best friend, a smart hedge fund manager, Chris Castroviejo, who had left Bear Stearns and teamed up with a group of traders and analysts who were starting their own group of onshore and offshore hedge funds.</p>

<p>My last job in my over 15-year career as a Wall Street financial engineer was Senior Vice President for Lehman Brothers, where I was a Senior Quant.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-drew-you-from-financial-quantitative-analysis-to-data-science">What drew you from Financial Quantitative Analysis to Data Science?</h5>

<p>It was very simple: after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers where I was a Senior Vice President, I (as well as many other quants), was in “job limbo,” meaning there were practically no jobs available anywhere, much less for structurers of exotic assets. I transitioned to Barclays Capital, but by the end of the first quarter of  2009 I was laid off along with most of the senior structurers and bankers who made the transition from Lehman.</p>

<p>The general public barely understood what a credit default swap or a credit transition matrix was, much less credit-linked notes, synthetic CDOs, CAT bonds, Markov-chain Monte Carlo and some of the instruments and techniques I had specialized in over the years. There was no appetite for any sort of exotic instrument, and no capital available for anything.</p>

<p>It was very frustrating because precisely then, as a consequence of the credit crunch, some of the best investment opportunities I had ever seen in my life materialized in the form of “Obama projects,” but I did not have any funds to invest, and they were clearly advantageous only to the wealthy with knowledge and some political connections.</p>

<p>Along with a couple of my friends from Deutsche Bank and Lehman Brothers, I put together a basic  infrastructure to raise capital and invest in such opportunities created by the Obama administration, but we were not able to get any commitments  by the deadlines set by the programs, and I found myself with a lot of free time, compared to the 70-90 hours per week I was used to putting in at investment banks.</p>

<p>At the same time this was happening, I found myself improving my programming skills, and learning all I could about data scraping, web crawlers, and artificial intelligence. I was fascinated by the possibilities. I started experimenting with  spiders to crawl some sites, and all of a sudden I was using the data in creative ways to find solutions to real-life problems.</p>

<p>One of those problems had to do with valuation of film productions. Years earlier, I had created a rather sophisticated valuation model, focused on securitization of film assets for Hollywood clients. I wondered if, by using comments in social sites, I could improve the accuracy of the model. I succeeded, but first had to develop additional algorithms to filter out the noise.</p>

<p>I kept coding and discovering more interesting things about the film industry, but was particularly attracted to the Internet Information Provider subsector of the tech market, since I could see analogies in the way Hollywood earns profits from films: you need to be in content creation, distribution, and advertisement in order to minimize your risks.</p>

<p>So I started reading the 10Ks and 10Qs of Google, Yahoo and other companies in the sector, and doing Monte Carlo simulations to learn about their strengths and weaknesses. I learned a great deal from that exercise.  At that point, I started considering myself a hybrid data scientist/financial quant, which I believe is a rare combination</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-would-you-have-done-differently-if-you-were-able-to-speak-to-yourself-right-at-the-endmiddle-of-your-graduate-school-career">What would you have done differently if you were able to speak to yourself right at the end/middle of your graduate school career?</h5>

<p>If I had that opportunity, I think I would just tell my earlier self to code more in languages other than Visual Basic. I would set up a plan for my earlier self to learn Octave and Python, and Java when it came out in 1995.</p>

<p>If I had the opportunity to speak to myself right around the middle of my professional career, let’s say circa 2001, I would have told myself to stay in New York as a general quant, instead of moving to London to be a front office quant pitching deals to European governments and corporations. Not that I didn’t do a good job as a structurer and relationships guy, but an unintended series of events happened around that time which I think could have had a better outcome for me and others, but who knows?</p>

<p>My advice is, focus more on what your own strengths are and less on what is perceived as a cool career path at the time.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-describe-the-value-that-you-and-other-ds-bring-to-the-company">How do you describe the value that you and other DS bring to the company?</h5>

<p>The value I bring to ttwick is my diversified analytical background and real-life experience in several industries that helps differentiate ttwick from other startups operating in DS.</p>

<p>I have been conducting informal job interviews with PhDs  I might eventually hire from diverse fields such as physics, economics, linguistics, engineering, microbiology, etc. with amazing potential to become Data Scientists.That is the sort of analytical diversity I want to have at ttwick.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-some-surprising-things-about-working-in-industry-vs-academia">What are some surprising things about working in industry vs. academia?</h5>

<p>I can best answer that question by giving two examples of situations taken from my own career.</p>

<p>The first example is the design of a financial structure to cover the government of El Salvador against the effects of excessive rainfall, which has a definitive impact on the GDP of that country. I was given that task in 1998 or 1999, I can’t remember. El Salvador’s economy is mainly driven by agricultural production, and extreme weather events could have catastrophic effects on the economy. Conventional countrywide insurance protection was either too expensive or unavailable, so I started to design a parametric bond-type structure. As usual, data was of the essence.</p>

<p>I got the data, but it was terrible, with wild swings in it that could not easily be fixed. The time-series had a numeric code representing the station, the name of the town/village, and the daily precipitation. The gaps represented a big problem in valuing the risk. But then I did some interesting data exploration: I asked some of my younger colleagues (Associates and Analysts) to help me gather the geolocations of the stations.</p>

<p>The time gaps corresponded to more or less well-defined, circular areas, always near a river or stream. I shared the findings with a government official in El Salvador who confirmed that the time periods of wild swings or gaps in the data corresponded more or less to the heights of internal political conflicts in El Salvador. The geographic areas I showed them represented the geolocations of what later were found to be the main camps of the FMLN (a guerilla coalition at war with the government in the 1980s and ’90s). By looking at the wild standard deviations and their locations in time and space, you could more or less predict the next hideout of the guerilla leaders, since they seemed to follow a defined pattern. It turned out the fluctuations were simply due to the destruction or misuse of pluviometers by the guerrillas, coupled with the fact that data collection was not frequent. In any case, I came up with a solution for the problem of rainfall measurement at certain points by correlating rain accumulation with water levels of rivers near the data collection stations, where I had better data.</p>

<p>The second example was from my time at Lehman Brothers. I was analyzing a corporate deal in an emerging market that involved a commodity as collateral. I had the data I needed for a conventional type of analysis. But something did not feel right , so I decided to enlist the help of another colleague, Jami Miscik, also a Senior Vice President. Before Lehman, Jami ran the National Clandestine Services of the Central Intelligence Agency under George Tenet. Around 2005, she joined Lehman Brothers as Global Head of Sovereign Risk Analysis, and to this day I consider her a very unique type of data scientist.</p>

<p>I was fascinated with Jami’s analytical skills for political risk; she’s equally talented in the art and science parts of data science. While at the CIA, Jami ran a complex quantitative and qualitative program to forecast political instability in 40 countries based on 25 indicators, and I was lucky enough to be one of the few executives invited to gather for her weekly world outlook meetings. At the suggestion of the Head of High Yield Trading at Lehman, I enlisted Jami and her team to dig a little deeper on the company I was analyzing.</p>

<p>After her report, I decided not to go ahead with the deal (this could be a topic for another book), and informed Jami of my decision, but in any case, Lehman was already in bad shape. I called to set up a meeting with her to personally thank her for her great work and see if I could discover a little more about her proprietary models and exchange ideas on a couple of topics. Both her calendar and mine were free for the same day: September 12, 2008, which turned out to be the historic last day of operations of Lehman Brothers. Nevertheless, we still kept our meeting and managed to talk for a little while.</p>

<p>A couple of years later, I started thinking about creating real-time political risk indicators by tapping and correlating many sources of publicly available data on the Internet, and “calibrating to market.” We did it and now we are successfully using our analysis to advise a few interesting groups out there..</p>

<p>I think the likelihood of getting exposure to the sort of data problems described above is zero or very small if you only have exposure to academia.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-measure-your-own-personal-career-success">How do you measure your own personal career success?</h5>

<p>A few years ago, I realized I had always been an entrepreneur inside much larger organizations and managed to obtain R&amp;D funding to develop and launch securities that many times were called crazy or impossible to launch.</p>

<p>So I ended up as a DS because when I started to analyze what my skills were, I realized that a DS is more or less a financial quant minus the financial knowledge. Remember, financial quants come from all fields: computer science, physics, math, economics, finance, etc.</p>

<p>At this moment, I measure my own personal career success by the fact that ttwick exists, it is funded, and some of my investors are either former bosses or colleagues of mine, and even traders, analysts, and/or executives of well-known financial institutions and media companies.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-work-with-other-people-on-your-team">How do you work with other people on your team?</h5>

<p>I assign tasks to the teams with the most relevant experience to the problem at hand whenever possible. Then I have periodic progress reports to review their work, and if I don’t understand something, or think there might be a better way to do it, I encourage discussion. We have all gained interesting insights from this process, and so far I am satisfied with the results.</p>

<p>I have several machine-learning specialists, data wranglers and general coders on my team who support what I do in DS. I would like to hire more DSs like me, but it is very difficult to find “diversified” DS, and even more difficult to find any with financial backgrounds.</p>

<p>Everything we’re doing at ttwick involves multiple disciplines, and my experience with multidisciplinary teams across several industries allows me to have fluid communication with my team members.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-type-of-careers-could-people-working-in-ds-transition-into-if-they-decide-ds-isnt-for-them">What type of careers could people working in DS transition into if they decide DS isn’t for them?</h5>

<p>Based on my own experience, I would say that financial quantitative analysis would be an option, but a person would have to learn at least some basic finance and get a CFA (or better yet, a CAIA) if they want to excel.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-separates-the-best-data-scientist-from-the-merely-good">What separates the best data scientist from the merely good?</h5>

<p>Since I describe data science as the art and science of extracting actionable intelligence from data, I would say a good data scientist has an academic and professional background that makes him or her good in the science part, but the best data scientists are talented in the art part as well.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-backgrounds-do-these-best-data-scientists-tend-to-have">What backgrounds do these best data scientists tend to have?</h5>

<p>I can’t really say, but to me, more than having a particular field of concentration, the best data scientists probably have experience solving problems for diverse industries. That creates the right frame of mind to attack problems from different perspectives; this might not be obvious to somebody who has only worked in one industry.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-who-are-some-ds-people-you-admire-who-are-people-doing-interesting-things-with-data-that-you-admire">Who are some DS people you admire? Who are people doing interesting things with data that you admire?</h5>

<p>To me, Hilary Mason is a great data scientist whom I would love to meet someday (and maybe invite for a cheeseburger). I find her work very interesting, as well as the work Claudia Pelrich at Dstillery has done in the area of detecting fraud in online advertising.  </p>

<p>Also, the work that professors David Cope, Larry Polansky, Peter Elsea and Daniel Brown at the University of California Santa Cruz are doing with artificial intelligence applied to creativity is extremely interesting. I spent a few weeks interacting with them at the UCSC, and what I learned is truly fascinating; for example, the use of non-speech audio to perceptualize data as a complement to visualization techniques, or even as a stand-alone technique.</p>

<p>There is also a group of Wall Street data scientists (or quants) whom not many people know of outside of trading, structured finance, risk management and/or political risk analysis. I already mentioned Jami Miscik and Marc Chaikin, but I should also mention Jorge Calderon and Phil Weingord (ex-heads of Global Asset Securitization for Deutsche Bank and Credit Suisse), Dr. Mark Shi at Citigroup, and Dr. Jose Hernandez and Blythe Masters at JP Morgan. I have worked with all of them, with the exception of Blythe Masters, who almost hired me for her Credit Risk Trading group, but I opted to take another offer.</p>

<p>The group above created many cutting-edge analytical and computational methods used today in financial engineering, risk management, and other fields, but unfortunately, the 2008 financial crisis and problems in the risk valuation of many MBS and CDS by rating agencies tainted a big chunk of the industry and overshadowed the work of a lot of good people.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-tell-me-about-some-of-the-ways-you-and-other-data-scientists-at-ttwick-keep-ahead-of-the-curve-education-wise">Can you tell me about some of the ways you and other data scientists at ttwick keep ahead of the curve, education wise?</h5>

<p>I attend a lot of conferences and meetups, and I read as many books as possible about the latest findings in artificial intelligence,, financial engineering and many other related topics.</p>

<p>I attended the Strata Conference 2014 in Santa Clara and it was fascinating to learn about some of the cutting edge initiatives at DARPA in the area of big data, the latest ML R&amp;D projects at Stanford, and in general, getting a feeling for the general direction of the industry. I highly recommend it to aspiring data scientists.</p>

<p>I also run a meetup group in New York called “Algorithmic Art - Quadrivium”, where Iexplore Machine Learning applied to creative arts, and the legal ramifications of proprietary artificial intelligence code creating content.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-your-personal-1-and-3-year-goals-as-a-data-scientist">What are your personal 1 and 3-year goals as a data scientist?</h5>

<p>My goals are to complete all the pending projects I have for ttwick, file patents for all the technologies we are developing, and help improve the efficiency of a couple of industries in which I have not seen significant improvements in decades.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-do-you-think-data-science-is-changing-over-the-next-few-years">How do you think data science is changing over the next few years?</h5>

<p>I expect the biggest advancements to come from high-performance computing and data storage.</p>

<p>Definitely, there will be more “toolkits” available to do data analysis. Data wrangling will become easier and faster (hopefully), data collection systems and sensors will probably have built-in data cleaning capabilities, or something like that, and testing of different methods will become faster. Also, I think data scientists will be incorporating a lot more hardcore time series analysis into their work, which I don’t see much outside of finance.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-are-some-new-developments-in-the-field-that-you-are-really-excited-about">What are some new developments in the field that you are really excited about?</h5>

<p>There are several exciting new ones:</p>

<ul><li>The DeepDive probability inference methodologies that Christopher Ré is building at Stanford;</li>
  <li>DARPA’s Memex project;</li>
  <li>A few of the developments related to semantic search, coupled with natural language, and the intersection with fintech, including the one in development at ttwick;</li>
  <li>The work of some people I know with cryptocurrencies;</li>
  <li>Artificial intelligence applied to algorithmic art (music derivatives, visual arts, etc.)</li>
</ul><p>I think any progress in any of those initiatives, along with adequate user adoption and new ethical business models for the data economy – all of these have the potential to disrupt many industries over the years to come.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
