<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Eithon Cadag</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-eithon-cadag">Eithon Cadag</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-data-scientist-at-ayasdi">Data Scientist at Ayasdi</h5>

<p>
  <em>Bridging the Chasm: From Biomedical Informatics to Data Science</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After dual degrees at the University of Washington followed by a PhD in Biomedical Informatics, Eithon came to data science through a focus on machine learning applied to biology. Although initially disinterested in low level programming, Eithon came to see the powerful application areas during his research and wrote a pipeline that is still used to identify pathogenic proteins for structure crystallization.</em>
</p>

<p>*After graduating, he worked on defense projects for various US government agencies, before striking into the heart of Silicon Valley. At the time of this interview, Eithon was a manager and principal data scientist at topological machine learning company Ayasdi, where he led analytical efforts in the healthcare and pharmaceutical space. In this interview, Eithon talks about his personal journey to data science mastery, and the joy of being insatiably curious. *</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-can-you-talk-a-little-bit-about-your-background">Can you talk a little bit about your background?</h5>

<p>I double degreed at the University of Washington in Business and Informatics; the latter is a specialized degree that focuses on data architecture and how people interact with data and information. </p>

<p>I originally thought of Computer Science as a major, but took a few classes and realized I didn’t want to be coding all at the time. So I opted for an option that potentially didn’t involve significant programming, but did involve many things that you would typically see when working on applied technical problems.</p>

<p>My undergrad focus was on Ubiquitous Computing, and my undergrad capstone project was on embedded barcoding and handheld computing. I can attribute this to my first job during college, which was at Intel Research in Seattle. At the time, the Lab’s stated focus was on ubiquitous computing; this means embedding computing into your environment or finding ways of using computing in ways well-integrated to the environment.</p>

<p>I worked on two research projects there: LabScape and PlaceLab. LabScape asked the question, “How can we embed computing systems within research laboratories to help scientists?” Basically, we’d develop studies on how scientists actually use software in the lab. PlaceLab, the second project, asked “Can we utilize WiFi devices to triangulate position and provide location-specific information to a user?” Have you ever heard of “wardriving”? Wardriving is basically driving around town with a computer whose Wifi scanner is on. You combine that with GPS, so you know the strengths of various signals around your current location; this can be coupled with contextual information, such as stores or services nearby. Then you triangulate that information that so when you or someone else is in that area again, you can provide information on what’s nearby purely from Wifi signal. Both of these were fun projects and I got to work with some really smart people at the lab.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-did-you-learn-how-to-write-code-during-these-projects">Did you learn how to write code during these projects?</h5>

<p>I wrote very little code initially. I wasn’t a really good programmer at the time, and was not terribly attracted to coding, and for both projects I worked on the user side of the research, such as usability and user testing. I didn’t become interested in programming until a later experience in biomedical science where I saw code development as another tool to accomplishing my goals.</p>

<p>Later as an undergraduate, I interned at Seattle Biomedical Research Institute under Peter Myler. My lab worked on infectious diseases, and my first project was to build software to identify genes. This experience got me really interested in biology and research in general. </p>

<p>There’s a problem in biology which is pretty fundamental: you have a series of sequences, DNA, and want to identify the location of genes. At a simple level you can find stop codons, which are short sequences that suggest the end of a gene. One challenge is working out where these stop codons start, as they sometimes have many potential starting points. Over the course of a summer, I built software that used a combination of different methods to determine optimal starting position. I then used additional biological information specific to the species of parasitic genomes we were studying, to further enhance the technique. </p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-was-that-project-the-catalyst-for-you-going-to-graduate-school">Was that project the catalyst for you going to graduate school?</h5>

<p>Yes, it’s also the project where I realized that coding wasn’t as bad as I thought, and began to appreciate the importance of computer science in modern biological research. At the time, all the computer science classes I took were taught in C, which is probably one reason I was a little turned off to the field; I wasn’t great at pointers or deallocating memory. But this was a great project because it had an application. I got to see what was going on, how it had an effect, and it made me interested in learning more about software engineering as applied to science.</p>

<p>I had a good understanding of the computational aspects because I’d encountered a project like that very early on.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-you-choose-graduate-school-and-also-how-did-you-choose-what-projects-you-wanted-to-work-on">How did you choose graduate school and also how did you choose what projects you wanted to work on?</h5>

<p>I started with a Masters. I was very interested in just learning more about computing and biology, and I knew my school actually had a degree that was specific for this kind of focus so I opted to stay there. I went to the University of Washington for my Masters in Biomedical and Health Informatics.</p>

<p>My focus was actually just the next step in the procedure of finding the genes. Now that we’ve found the genes, can we make a best guess about what it is actually doing in the biological system it operates?</p>

<p>I used logic and data integration to annotate the genes; biology is full of databases that have information about genes. The problem is they’re so disconnected and fragmented that it’s difficult for someone to make sense of it. What we had was essentially a system for collecting this information wholesale and then federating them under some uniform schema. This schema says: “Here’s a gene. It translates to a protein. Here is some information associated with the gene.” </p>

<p>I worked on this with my advisor Peter Myler and the head of my department, Peter Tarczy-Hornoch. Essentially, our solution was to treat these sources as a large database. We mapped the information of data sources in an automatic fashion to the contents of the schema. Now you can start to ask things like, “What are the functions to which this gene maps?” We used logical inference to resolve these questions. Part of this was doing some shallow NLP, allowing us to parse the gene functions and other descriptors. It worked pretty well in comparison with human scientists doing manual annotation.</p>

<p>That was my Masters thesis. After that I wanted to work on something a little bit different for my PhD.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-while-there-is-a-lot-of-biology-in-your-research-there-also-seems-to-be-a-strong-theme-of-building-and-engineering-systems-did-you-continue-this-intermixing-of-biology-and-engineering-in-your-phd">While there is a lot of biology in your research, there also seems to be a strong theme of building and engineering systems. Did you continue this intermixing of biology and engineering in your PhD?</h5>

<p>While there was a heavy component of engineering, I wasn’t the only person working on the software platform on which my Masters project was built. There were a number of other folks in the lab that were working on variations of the same data integration methodology to solve different kinds of problems. In my PhD, I thought what I was doing with logic was great but there was something unsatisfying about doing something that’s a series of conditional rules. I wanted something more unified.</p>

<p>I started to read a lot about newer statistical methods. I thought we could apply some of them to federated data for protein characterization. Data integration generated a ton of information, and statistical techniques seemed to provide a more efficient way of making sense of that information without requiring curated logic. So that’s essentially what I did for my PhD. I took proteins and developed and applied a way of assigning function to them using data integration and statistical learning. Luckily, William Noble, one of the early researchers who helped pioneer machine learning techniques in biology was a professor at UW so I was able to get his help.</p>

<p>I focused primarily on pathogenic proteins; these are proteins in bacteria that tend to cause disease. An example would be one that facilitates the invasion of a bacterium into the host cell; another could be a protein that helps the bacteria attach to the host cell. All these functions were particularly critical for a consortium run by my advisor, the Seattle Structural Genomics Center for Infectious Disease. The Center’s mandate was to characterize and crystallize as many new proteins as possible from neglected pathogens.</p>

<p>The overall result was an approach that gathered heterogeneous and noisy data from myriad biological sources, unified them, and then used statistical methods to determine the likeliest protein functional class. We used the method that I developed to help prioritize and classify proteins for wet lab investigation. Even now, I will get an email from my old collaborators every so often saying, “One of those proteins that you selected in your system was just crystallized, it has a structure we’ve never seen before.” It’s wonderful and gratifying to see that my work is having a direct effect on the advancement of life science.</p>

<p>Graduate school was a really fulfilling time for me, because I was able to spend time exploring and found the specific niche in which I was really interested. If you have a good advisor and you have good support, it’s easy to do have this type of experience. The problem is that a lot of it depends on the luck of the draw. Did you pick the right advisor? Did you pick the right project? It’s especially true in the sciences where if you pick the wrong project, it might not bear fruit and you feel like you lost time. So I was lucky in the sense that I had great advisors and really great research projects to work on.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-it-seems-like-although-you-didnt-necessarily-concentrate-in-cs-in-undergraduate-what-you-did-for-your-masters-project-and-also-your-phd-was-just-as-extensive-of-an-education-in-data-integration-software-engineering-and-machine-learning-algorithms-how-did-you-learn-these-topics-without-a-background-in-them">It seems like although you didn’t necessarily concentrate in CS in undergraduate, what you did for your master’s project and also your PhD was just as extensive of an education in data integration, software engineering and machine learning algorithms. How did you learn these topics without a background in them?</h5>

<p>I think I was fortunate at the very least. Even though I did not start with a lot of hardcore programming skills, I did have a component of them from classes an undergrad.</p>

<p>But I think the biggest thing that contributed to my skill set was doing graduate school. Typically, graduate school is taking a few core classes followed by going deep into something you’re really interested in. As you go deep you are forced to learn the things you need to know along the way. So you end up taking extra classes, reading a lot, and meeting people who are experts in their fields because the goal is eventually to become an expert in your own field; you have to know quite a bit to advance science even just a little. At the time, as I learned more technical and analytical skills, it wasn’t learning just for learning sake, but as a means to an end. For me, this perspective made the learning much more interesting.</p>

<p>For example, one of the things I ended up doing as an aside with some colleagues was Natural Language Processing (NLP). We ended up organizing an NLP conference and workshop in my last year of graduate school. My role there was developing a quick software system for annotating medical notes used by workshop participants, and designing the statistical technique to evaluate results. </p>

<p>It was a competition. We had people from across the country submit their programs and their methods to pull out information from natural language text, which is actually pretty hard. Not only did they have to extract the medication, but they had to report the route and dose for the medication, all from transcribed medical narratives. This was a nice opportunity for me to work more on both my software skills and my statistical capabilities. These are the sorts of opportunities available in research, and especially in grad school, that helped hone my skills in research execution.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-did-you-also-enroll-in-graduate-coursework-or-were-you-completely-self-taught">Did you also enroll in graduate coursework, or were you completely self-taught?</h5>

<p>I took quite a few CS and other classes where there was some significant programming involved. Also, in my Masters program I worked a lot on a large code base. It was a fairly significant repo, with multiple people checking in/out code. So I had to really know my way around code and know that other people were going to be reading my work; I had to write decent comments and know what’s going on. Also, it was all in Java, which is a language that somewhat enforces structured overhead to begin with.</p>

<p>In addition, I worked very briefly for Cerner Corporation; they make one of the largest electronic medical record systems (EMR) in the US. I actually got to work on pretty cool R&amp;D projects for their medical informatics group, and I had to keep the code well commented. Part of the exercise there was learning what is standard acceptable practice for software engineering. So that was a good opportunity to get an understanding of how engineering is done in a much larger ecosystem.</p>

<p>I think the nice thing about software development in general is that you don’t necessarily have to focus on it to pick it up. Reading is a pretty important component, both online and in books. There’s a canonical book on software engineering with regards to generating programming patterns. I read the whole book during the summer while I was working for that company. However, I don’t think there’s any better way than actually looking at other people’s code and writing code yourself. I had some really brilliant colleagues who wrote awesome code. So getting to see what they did and learning from them was a huge benefit.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-we-talked-to-several-other-people-and-it-seems-like-your-graduate-experience-was-very-extensive-not-only-did-you-work-on-these-two-awesome-projects-but-also-you-just-found-time-to-do-extra-bits">We talked to several other people and it seems like your graduate experience was very extensive. Not only did you work on these two awesome projects but also you just found time to do extra bits.</h5>

<p>I hardly slept in my last year! You realize when you’re in graduate school that as soon as you’re finished, it’s the real world. So I wanted to cram as much opportunity to learn as possible within the last couple of years there.</p>

<p>The other thing was that I got a scholarship from the Department of Defense to finish within a certain amount of time, because after that I’d get a job with the government as a civil servant. So if I didn’t graduate in time I’d get a penalty of more time in the government, which was not necessarily bad, but I wanted the option to leave whenever I wanted. My Masters was two years, a standard Masters. My PhD was about three and a half. When the US government can come after you for not finishing your degree when you said you would, that’s pretty good motivation to finish on time!</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-immediately-after-graduating-did-you-have-any-thoughts-about-staying-in-academia">So immediately after graduating, did you have any thoughts about staying in academia?</h5>

<p>Yes, I always considered it. But I had this obligation to the government to finish first. Because they paid for my last half year so I owed them the same amount in service.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-one-of-the-things-that-come-up-when-people-are-thinking-of-leaving-academia-is-that-they-feel-isolated-whereas-the-draw-of-industry-is-that-its-intensely-collaborative-what-was-your-experience-like">One of the things that come up when people are thinking of leaving academia is that they feel isolated, whereas the draw of industry is that it’s intensely collaborative. What was your experience like?</h5>

<p>A computational biologist will often work in conjunction with other scientists. If you think about a modern biological lab, you have a Principal Investigator, a number of technicians, wet lab scientists, people doing data management and then you might have a set of computational biologists. I think in modern biology you have a multidisciplinary team working on the same general problem where each person has their own task. One person designs experiments, another person does the data management. A different person follows up and sees if the results corroborate with models.</p>

<p>So in some sense it’s a squad. Each person has a specialized role and has ownership. It’s also very humbling because even for your small piece, you often realize there is something you didn’t take into account. That’s just biology: unless you have a gigantic memory capacity, you’re never going to commit the entire breadth of the field to recall.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-after-your-stint-with-the-government-what-were-your-thoughts-on-what-to-do-next">After your stint with the government, what were your thoughts on what to do next?</h5>

<p>One thing about science PhDs is typically you have to do a postdoctorate. I liked working for the government because of the emphasis on application; what I did there was being used to make decisions. So I wanted to find a postdoctorate that would give me that similar experience while still considering government as a field of work. I ended up coming over to Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California, to work as a postdoctoral scientist.</p>

<p>It was perfect because it gave me options. I could stay in government because it was still a government institution. However, it was also a postdoctorate so it meant I could go into academia afterward. Finally, it put me within striking distance of Silicon Valley. I felt it maximized my opportunities at the time.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-after-finishing-your-postdoctorate-you-had-the-chance-then-to-look-for-academic-positions-but-also-you-were-really-close-to-silicon-valley-so-there-were-a-lot-of-startups-and-industry-opportunities-so-how-did-this-influence-your-thought-process">After finishing your postdoctorate you had the chance then to look for academic positions, but also you were really close to Silicon Valley so there were a lot of startups and industry opportunities. So how did this influence your thought process?</h5>

<p>I have to admit that I probably wasn’t as committed to doing academia at that point. I think if someone is so close to everything that’s going on in Silicon Valley you’d be remiss to not at least think about it. My postdoctorate was about to end, and the funding was lacking for this project. So there was uncertainty with regards to the likelihood of finding another project in my field there. Biodefense funding in government tends to come in waves of feast or famine.</p>

<p>I happened to be contacted by a recruiter out of the blue, who mentioned some mobile game companies that were really interested in finding someone to do data analysis and software engineering. So I thought, “I’m actually interested in biology and medicine, so if there’s anything there that would be a better fit.” She called me back later, tells me about this company, Ayasdi, and sent me a summary of what they were doing. It looked quite interesting, and ended up interviewing and joining. I think I was the 15th employee of the company.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-and-youve-seen-ayasdi-grow-from-a-15-person-company-to-now-many-multiples-larger-youve-worked-in-many-different-settings-including-very-applied-projects-that-eventually-led-you-to-the-exciting-world-of-startups-although-it-was-never-your-direct-intention-do-you-think-yourself-very-fortunate">And you’ve seen Ayasdi grow from a 15-person company to now many multiples larger. You’ve worked in many different settings, including very applied projects, that eventually led you to the exciting world of startups, although it was never your direct intention. Do you think yourself very fortunate?</h5>

<p>Let me just step back a little bit. When you pick a major in undergraduate, part of that decision is thinking about what kind of job you want after you graduate. An important part of that question is: what are the skills that you want to pick up along the way? I don’t think graduate school is any different. I think one thing people in grad school have to be aware of is if they’re not fully committed to academia, you have to make sure that you’re building enough of a general skill set that you still have plenty of non-academic options open.</p>

<p>Take my grad work in data integration. I wouldn’t call myself a world expert in it, but I also know it’s a challenging problem that’s important for people to pick up and am fortunate to have gained valuable experience in it. In many cases, it’s a neglected area of expertise. So you want to be able to pick up things that you know are going to be useful.</p>

<p>Being able to pick that up and learn from smart people and get their advice was extremely valuable. Domain and skill don’t necessarily have to be completely intertwined. You can have a domain focus (in my case it’s biology and medicine), but you can still continuously pick up skills that are applicable to that domain but also have broad generalizability to others. I’m thinking about not just undergraduate but also graduate school going forward. Maybe you have a domain, but it’s important to understand that there are things that aren’t necessarily specific for that but are worth learning.</p>

<p>For me it’s been tremendously worthwhile. While developing the next iteration of Ayasdi’s software, we were at a little bit of a loss for how to figure out what to do with regards to the usability. I actually got to leverage undergraduate experience to help our team fix some of the early difficulties with usability.</p>

<p>Another example is just general analytical capabilities. The challenge in science is that statistics isn’t something with which many researchers are very adept. In many cases designing an experiment, even a computational experiment comparing methods, requires just basic statistics — enough that you can write a paper that confirms you’ve validated the results and you know that one method is likely better than others. </p>

<p>Also, I think breadth in our field is just as important in many ways as depth. Because if you’re touching all this data of various size and form, it’s important to have a good characterization of what you know and what you don’t know. The more broadly you have that, the better, but it’s also good if you have an area where you can go really deep. For me that’s biology and medicine.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-so-with-all-this-in-mind-when-you-joined-ayasdi-did-you-ever-think-wow-this-is-really-different-from-my-previous-roles-and-were-there-places-where-you-thought-wow-im-really-glad-i-had-x-y-z-experiences-because-this-feels-exactly-the-same">So with all this in mind, when you joined Ayasdi, did you ever think, “Wow, this is really different from my previous roles”? And were there places where you thought, “Wow I’m really glad I had x, y, z experiences because this feels exactly the same”?</h5>

<p>This is a very interesting position in the sense that a lot of it is actually working directly with people. If I look back at my background it’s mostly been head down working-on-numbers research. So having this component of it is quite unique for me. We are doing that heads down and work part, but there’s also a very significant part that involves working with new customers and understanding what their current challenge is, and how best to convey a solution. One of the biggest challenges I had to overcome was to suppress my introversion enough that I could speak without stumbling over my words. It was a big hurdle initially, but I’ve had plenty of practice now and eventually got comfortable with it.</p>

<p>Skill-wise, one of the key conditions when you’re looking at pharmaceutical data is that you have to be particularly rigorous about the statistics. This is a realm where we don’t necessarily want faster machine learning. We just want traditional, well-understood methods so that we know with some level of confidence that the results make sense. Fortunately, I’d had plenty of exposure during my graduate and undergraduate studies doing statistics and designing computational experiments.</p>

<p>A lot of emphasis is placed on the use of more advanced methods when in many cases having just a sound foundational understanding of basic statistics is more critical. It gives you grounding to look at an experimental design and understand at a very simple level why it was design in that way. Why are these the main effects? Why are they characterizing something this way? Why did they select these number of replicates? Using more exotic machine learning is great too and is often appropriate for contemporary data problems, but at the end of the day there are some really basic things that everyone has to know.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-when-we-say-data-science-most-people-think-about-just-data-but-less-about-science-a-lot-of-people-who-do-data-science-in-industry-start-with-the-methods-themselves-and-never-really-ask-the-questions-such-as-what-is-causing-the-phenomena-in-the-first-place-how-do-i-test-that-rigorously">When we say data science, most people think about just data but less about science. A lot of people who do data science in industry start with the methods themselves and never really ask the questions such as: “What is causing the phenomena in the first place? How do I test that rigorously?”</h5>

<p>I think one of the good things in biology is you’re forced to ask those questions. Typically, even simple methods can do quite well in biology under certain circumstances. I think in some sense what we have at this company is a fairly simple method, and I think that supervised methods typically are a great way to start and a great way to start to get into more detail. But, at the same time you just have to guard against this desire to go after the most interesting method when sometimes the simplest thing will give you the best and most explainable answer. As a scientist, I always want to be able to go back and understand the underlying principles. But if you’re looking at prediction, maybe that’s less important.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-youve-worked-at-ayasdi-for-a-few-years-now-but-youve-seen-the-injection-of-data-science-into-the-general-vernacular-of-the-technology-companies-how-do-you-make-sense-of-what-people-are-doing-with-the-term-data-science-today-how-do-you-think-ayasdi-fits-into-this-ecosystem">You’ve worked at Ayasdi for a few years now, but you’ve seen the injection of data science into the general vernacular of the technology companies. How do you make sense of what people are doing with the term “data science” today? How do you think Ayasdi fits into this ecosystem?</h5>

<p>I didn’t even know this term existed until I got this position. I didn’t know data was a discipline of science. I thought it was a prerequisite for science, not a study unto itself. I’ve heard the definition, “It’s someone who’s better at coding than a statistician, and someone who’s better at statistics than a programmer.” In some ways you can turn it on its head: it’s someone who’s worse at coding than a software engineer but is worse at statistics than a statistician! I’m joking of course, but that’s how I feel about it sometimes since I’m well aware of my own shortcomings.</p>

<p>A lot of people that do this role have very interesting backgrounds. You don’t have a huge majority of people coming from a specific discipline; it’s mixed. When you look at something like computational biology, we’re used to dealing with messy, noisy, ill-formatted data. There are quite a few people who come from a biology background that do data analytics and data science. Maybe they picked up data wrangling skills along the way to do extract-transform-load.</p>

<p>The other component that is also pretty critical is some kind of statistical training. At the end of the day, the term data science means you’re a scientist, and you have an obligation to deliver results correctly. If you’re not happy with it you go back to the drawing board. There’s an important ability to understand and be able to evaluate whether or not what you’ve done makes sense from a statistical standpoint.</p>

<p>Then there is the domain expertise aspect. In many cases, we’re tackling problems that are fairly difficult and that require a lot of knowledge of a particular area. Moreover, being able to go to subject matter experts and speak the same language goes a long way to gaining credibility and trust from the person with whom you’re working.</p>

<p>I think many of the applied science areas of study, and certainly things that involve experimentation, are where many people get a lot of broad experience. Graduate school is great for giving you that deep domain knowledge and then hopefully along the way you’ve picked up sufficient amounts of statistics or mathematics to speak coherently about what you’ve generated, as well as the technical chops to execute.</p>

<p>Sometimes it’s just practice. For example, maybe you won’t know having certain data in a specific way is a problem, unless you’ve seen it before and have done the repetitions to deal with it in a very fast way. If you do this enough, even a massive data set can be turned over very quickly because you’ve seen it before and you know exactly what to do. In some sense a lot of it is as much pure practice as it is science.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-you-answered-the-first-part-of-my-question-the-second-part-is-how-do-you-see-data-science-in-general-do-you-feel-like-ayasdi-is-doing-something-different-from-the-mobile-apps-companies-and-if-so-what-is-that-special-something">You answered the first part of my question. The second part is: “How do you see data science in general?” Do you feel like Ayasdi is doing something different from the mobile apps companies? And if so, what is that special something?</h5>

<p>When you look at what a lot of places are doing, it’s variations on the same theme. Which isn’t to say that’s bad or wrong; sometimes that’s what you have to do and there’s a big market in making that better and faster. In many cases there are tools and methods right off the shelf that one can adapt. Often, these were things that were developed just for those problems.</p>

<p>There’s been a big focus on supervised methods. However, as data grows, there are potentially many outcomes of interest — for some problems, we may have little idea of what to train for or what the expected outcomes even should be. It’s not that our current methods are deficient, but that with so much data, the number of potential questions with valuable answers grows very rapidly and cannot be enumerated by humans alone. Can we take advantage of very basic ideas in mathematics, such as distance metrics, and understand better where direct our attention?</p>

<p>What we do at Ayasdi is a very interesting way of looking at the large data problem. Our method applies well to high dimensional challenges or in many cases where people are completely inundated with data but have no idea where to search for potentially high impact discoveries. I can’t tell you how many times I’ve been in a meeting where someone says, “We have a lot of data, we know there’s something awesome in it that we can use to optimize our process/business/medicine/drug. But we don’t know where to start.”</p>

<p>Being able to elegantly and mathematically tackle this is going to be extremely useful as this becomes a very common problem. We’re already seeing this in many different business areas. Speaking just from my experience in biology and medicine, I see a lot of opportunity as more genomic and health information is collected and stored. There is a huge amount of value in just asking the right questions; the problem is that human ability to formulate reasonable hypotheses is finite and limited. So being able to identify and prioritize those questions in a data-driven way is going to be extremely important going forward.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-do-you-see-coming-out-of-the-pipeline-in-the-next-three-to-five-years-in-medicine-and-computational-biology-that-youre-excited-by-and-that-wouldnt-be-possible-without-the-new-data-tools-and-techniques-being-developed">What do you see coming out of the pipeline in the next three to five years in medicine and computational biology that you’re excited by, and that wouldn’t be possible without the new data tools and techniques being developed?</h5>

<p>Medicine is a very interesting field. It’s a field where you need a lot of domain expertise to be really proficient. Take a physician for example who has to go through many years of school, sometimes more than a PhD, to be really good at what they do. How do they do that? They don’t do that by reading formulas or theorems. The biggest and most important component of their training is going to the hospital and seeing patients. </p>

<p>That’s how medicine is. But I think as we move forward it’s going to be critical to inject a lot of data there. To capture data, understand what’s going on, understanding how different practices affect results and outcomes. That’s not even touching the genomic aspect and personalized medicine. There’s so much information, there’s so much variability in how patients get treated across the board. How do we help make this more uniform?</p>

<p>Optimizing patient outcomes is a very interesting problem because it’s something that’s always been there and surprisingly, we do all these things with data but that’s still something that everyone wants to solve. I think that’s one area in medicine where where data science can help to make a positive and lasting impact.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-i-think-that-one-of-the-things-you-mentioned-very-early-on-that-doesnt-get-talked-about-much-is-just-how-much-work-it-takes-to-be-really-good-at-something-when-you-first-started-working-you-worked-very-late-into-the-night-most-nights-doing-analysis-what-drove-you-and-drives-you-as-a-data-scientist-today">I think that one of the things you mentioned very early on that doesn’t get talked about much is just how much work it takes to be really good at something. When you first started working, you worked very late into the night, most nights doing analysis. What drove you, and drives you as a data scientist today?</h5>

<p>I think probably the biggest thing was curiosity. That’s actually a huge component. When I’m up late and trying to figure out a problem, my personal goal is to better understand what is driving whatever phenomena I am observing. I just want to find out. I’ve had this plenty of times here when working at Ayasdi, where I find myself facing a problem that is just driving me bonkers because I want to understand it better. Maybe I found this pattern and that pattern, and they all point to the same thing, but the outcome is the inverse of what I thought! So I want to dig deeper and know why. I think like any scientist the thing that drives me the most and really compels me to work late into the night until the sun comes up is curiosity.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-if-you-could-catch-yourself-in-graduate-school-walking-out-of-a-lab-at-3-am-and-had-a-chance-to-speak-to-yourself-what-would-you-have-told-yourself-how-would-you-have-lived-life-differently-or-would-you-have-chosen-anything-different">If you could catch yourself in graduate school walking out of a lab at 3 a.m. and had a chance to speak to yourself, what would you have told yourself? How would you have lived life differently? Or would you have chosen anything different?</h5>

<p>In terms of general direction, I probably wouldn’t change very much. I love biology and medicine, and the work is tremendously fulfilling. For the benefit of people who are interested in the field and doing data science as a career though, I would definitely say take as many statistics courses as possible. If anything, I would have told myself, “Hey! I know you don’t want to take that statistics genetics course because you have a completely full load, but take it anyways because you’ll end up using that information in your career at some point.” I end up having to look back at scattered notes or books because I didn’t take that statistical genetics course. Take more statistics courses, and take more math courses; though focus on statistics more than anything.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
