<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Clare Corthell</title>
<link href="stylesheet.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
</head>
<body>
<div>
<h2 id="leanpub-auto-clare-corthell">Clare Corthell</h2>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-data-scientist-at-mattermark">Data Scientist at Mattermark</h5>

<p>
  <em>Creating Your Own Data Science Curriculum</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>After graduating from Stanford, Clare Corthell embarked on a self-crafted journey to acquire the knowledge and skills to understand and analyze macro-behavioral trends. One thing led to another, and her collection of resources turned into the Open Source Data Science Masters - a curriculum of online courses, books and other resources that one could use to learn the mathematical and programming foundation crucial to a data scientist.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Clare took a risky move by crafting her own degree program, outside of traditional educational institutions. She faced skepticism of a self-taught individual in a job that is typically inhabited by PhDs, but also found a community of supportive colleagues.</em>
</p>

<p>
  <em>Overcoming these challenges, Clare completed her Open Source Data Science Masters and found herself as a data scientist at Mattermark, a venture-backed data startup working with large datasets to help professional investors quantify and discover signals of potentially high-growth companies.</em>
</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-was-your-background-before-you-began-the-open-source-data-science-masters-and-before-your-role-at-mattermark">What was your background, before you began the Open Source Data Science Masters and before your role at Mattermark?</h5>

<p>I’m a product person and an entrepreneur. I fell in love with startups long before I attended Stanford, where I designed a degree in a then-obscure program called <em>Science, Technology &amp; Society</em>. You get to marry two engineering tracks, so I ended up designing a degree in product design and digital development, which then got me started working on product with early stage companies.</p>

<p>Before the OSDSM (Open Source Data Science Masters), I was designing and prototyping products for an early stage education technology company in Germany. Designing from user anecdotes alone became difficult when you only pull from anecdotes, so I started digging deeper into analytics and customer profiling. I started thinking about observing meta-trends among users instead of studying their behavior with a clipboard from behind a one-way window. What if I just ran several tests on two different prototypes? Then we would have data to tell us which one to develop! But as with many European startups, the company didn’t get funded, so I had a few weeks to think about how this new perspective fit in. On a long layover in Barcelona, I ordered an espresso and wrote down the technical skills I would need to dissect meta-trends and understand user data. That list laid out 6 months of full-time work, after which I’d really be able to do some damage. This became the Open Source Data Science Masters.</p>

<p>As with any story, it is now retrospectively clear that I would secretly fall in love with an applied statistics class I cheekily called “Exceltastic.” We worked with Bayes’ Theorem and Markov Chains in the business context, figuring out things like how many cars can pass through two toll booths per hour. Everyone else sulked and moaned through munging spreadsheets while I harbored a dirty secret: I loved Excel models! Even so, I didn’t know when my toll booth throughput calculations would be demanded of me, nor what class logically comes next. It took getting into industry to shed light on the value of keeping metrics. Things like my Exceltastic class don’t seem to fit into an overarching puzzle, but we believe they shape our path. That’s the power of confirmation bias. One of my favorite designers has this phrase that he prints in various media: “Everything I do always comes back to me.” I’ve always found that fitting.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-is-the-open-source-data-science-masters-what-does-its-curriculum-look-like">What is the Open Source Data Science Masters? What does its curriculum look like?</h5>

<p>It’s a collection of open-source resources that help a programmer acquire the skills necessary to be a competent entry-level data scientist. The first version included introductory linear algebra, statistics, databases, algorithms, graph analysis, data mining, natural language processing, and machine learning. I wrote the curriculum for myself, then I realized that people all over the internet were asking for it, so I published it on GitHub.</p>

<p>In August, I opened the curriculum for pull requests on GitHub. Without feedback it’s difficult to know whether you’ve covered the right things. Further, it was an effort to get feedback on the idea of an institution-free degree, a kind of home-school for advanced degrees. The internet was astonishingly supportive and excited - and that excitement is addictive. It makes you want to be more transparent, and to become part of other peoples’ wonder in learning new things.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-you-get-started-with-the-open-source-data-science-masters">How did you get started with the Open Source Data Science Masters?</h5>

<p>I knew that a traditional Masters program would take at least the next three years of my life, but even more importantly it wouldn’t focus on what is core to the profession I wanted to enter. I knew what I wanted and I was willing to take the risk of a non-institution education.</p>

<p>I set out for the curriculum to take 6 months to complete (March - August 2013), with a small project at the end and various programming mini-projects focusing on scraping, modeling, and analysis. It was amazing how difficult it was to manage myself. School gives you this structure that you don’t have to question or design, which you don’t really see until you have to manage your own curriculum and deadlines. There’s a lot of product management that goes into an educational track like the OSDSM. I’m grateful to all the people who supported me and helped me throughout, even if they didn’t quite understand the strange and uncharted waters I was braving to get there.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-did-you-find-the-resources">How did you find the resources?</h5>

<p>I reverse-engineered most of it from job descriptions that interested me. This meant companies I believed would grow quickly and provide the most opportunity: mid-stage startups, 100-200 people, existing data science teams and reverence for the methodology. I didn’t want to be the lone wolf and knew I needed mentorship.</p>

<p>People tend to frown on centering the goals of the classroom on applicability in the real world, but a classic liberal educational approach in a technical career pivot won’t serve you. This is a technical vocational degree, so the goal was very concrete. I should be employable and employed on a data science (or Analytics Engineering) team after completing the curriculum.</p>

<p>There was another realization that coalesced very quickly: the act of designing from insights of single users does not scale. I was also hankering for something more technically and algorithmically challenging. I’d bought this book before I moved to Germany, <em>Programming Collective Intelligence</em>. I just bought it, I really had no reason to. When I first opened it up, I understood next to nothing. But I carried it with me in Germany, and every time I opened it, something new jumped out and I understood more about scaling user insight. The book became my cornerstone, how I measured my progress. It’s a bible for Data Scientists.</p>

<p>I also used the following resources/websites:</p>

<ul><li>Quora
    <ul><li>This is a great resource for the Valley - it’s truly navel-gazing, but if that’s what you’re doing, it’s useful. People like DJ have answered questions about what a Data Scientist does on a daily basis. You can start to discern the technical capacities that are required of you, mathematical foundations that are necessary, and so forth. </li>
    </ul></li>
  <li>Blogs
    <ul><li>Zipfian Academy, a data science bootcamp, had a blog. They had a great post on the resources they saw as core to becoming a data scientist: <a href="http://www.zipfianacademy.com/blog/post/46864003608/a-practical-intro-to-data-science">A Practical Intro to Data Science</a>
</li>
    </ul></li>
  <li>Coursera
    <ul><li>I’m Coursera’s biggest fanboy. They’re part of this quietly-brewing educational revolution, which will soon be less quiet. My story is a tremor before the earthquake, I’m just waiting for the ground to start shaking.</li>
    </ul></li>
</ul><h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-much-math-probability-statistics-ml-did-you-try-to-learn-how-much-math-do-you-think-a-data-scientist-needs-to-know">How much math (probability, statistics, ML) did you try to learn? How much math do you think a data scientist needs to know?</h5>

<p>You don’t have to know everything. That’s why I’ve tried to keep the curriculum so tightly focused on its goal. Programmers are great at “just-in-time” learning because it’s impossible to know everything. That’s a great trait. If you have a core set of competencies and understand how to “debug” problems and learn what you need to solve them, you can do damage. And naturally, you improve over time by recognizing new problems as chunks of old problems you’ve already seen and solved.</p>

<p>So much of this curriculum is abstract, and that’s where people get scared. People are scared of math because it’s not applied in our education system. But those scary elements of math and abstraction diminish with concrete examples and conversations with others. I had a few phone-a-friend lifelines, and I ate up Khan Academy and Coursera videos. There’s something magical about how much more communicative spoken English can be, especially when you can rewind and digest a concept for the second, third, or even fourth time. You can always talk through a problem with someone else, even if they’re not an expert. Talking through things is synonymous with debugging. One of my mentors calls this “the rubber ducky method,” because if you talk a problem through to a plastic duck, sometimes you start to find the holes in your assumptions. Then you can plug them up.</p>

<p>If you think about people as having different levels of competency in these different realms, it doesn’t take long to understand that working as a team allows you to stack your respective skills on top of one another. Having specialties among the team is really essential to getting things done in a small organization. I was lucky enough to join a company where I get mentorship in verticals where I’m middling or even an amateur. It’s amazing to learn with other people. Finding a job where you have mentors and training is essential to continue to grow and improve. And if you’re not improving and growing, you’re dead in the water. So that’s a long-winded way of saying: Working with other people is essential to working with more complex concepts and systems. Rome wasn’t built by some guy, and probably not at a weekend hackathon.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-would-you-do-differently-if-you-could-redo-the-masters">What would you do differently if you could redo the Masters?</h5>

<p>As Patient Zero of a new type of internet-based institution-free education, I didn’t know what to expect. It was impossible to know how I would be judged and whether I would benefit from my experiment. This type of ambiguity usually makes people extremely uncomfortable. It’s like leaving a six-year-old in the library by herself instead of putting her in class with a teacher. What is she going to do? Pull a bunch of books onto the floor and see how high she can stack them? Watch birds at the window and think about how wings work? Or is she going to find something interesting and gather books that will help her form her own ideas about the world?</p>

<p>I knew that it would be a risk, but I took a leap of faith and left myself alone in the library. In the end, the greatest reward didn’t come from the curriculum, it came from what taking a risk demonstrated about me. It led me to a tribe that respected the risk I had taken, and valued the grit that it required to follow through. Many people were displeased that I let myself into the library without an adult. But I’m not interested in taking the recommended path and clinging to a librarian. I have no interest in small ambition.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-whats-the-difference-between-data-science-job-descriptions--day-to-day-role-at-mattermark">What’s the difference between data science job descriptions &amp; day-to-day role at Mattermark?</h5>

<p>Our CEO Danielle was once asked how many data scientists we have at Mattermark. We’re all data scientists, she thought - we all use, manipulate, and analyze data on a daily basis to make our customers happier and more profitable. We even all write SQL! That’s not something you see every day at a company, but it’s essential when you’re building and selling a data product. I build products as an engineer, anything from fitting clustering algorithms, building automated analyses, designing UIs, acquiring new data - it’s a startup. It’s all hands on deck.</p>

<p>It’s not clear that data science is a job title to stay yet. For example, do we know if growth hacking is a subset of data science? We don’t. There will always be a top-level salary for a person who can turn chaos into insights. That won’t change. Data Scientist is a title we’ll continue to use while we figure it out.</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-what-could-someone-in-school-or-otherwise-without-too-much-background-in-industry-learn-from-your-experience">What could someone in school, or otherwise without too much background in industry learn from your experience?</h5>

<p>The ability to evolve my own career with a self-designed curriculum begins to outline the immense cracks in the foundation of higher education*. The deconstruction of this system was very long in coming, but it’s happening now. The lesson is the following: if you take initiative and acquire skills that increment your value, the market is able and willing to reward you.</p>

<p>Though people continue to believe and espouse old patterns of education and success, these patterns do not represent requirements or insurance. The lack of any stamp of approval is a false barrier. There are no rules.</p>

<p>It’s important to understand the behavior of the market and institutions with regard to your career. When breaking out of the patterns of success, know that people will judge you differently than others who have followed the rules.</p>

<p>There are two very discrete things that I learned: The market is requiring people to perform tryouts for jobs instead of interviews, and most companies don’t hire for your potential future value.</p>

<p>Tryouts as Interviews: The economy has set a very high bar for people coming into a new profession. Job descriptions always describe a requirement for previous experience, which is paradoxical because you need experience to get it. Don’t let that scare you, not for a minute. Pull on your bootstraps and get in the door by giving yourself that experience - design and execute on a project that demonstrates your ability to self-lead. Demonstrate that you can take an undefined problem and design a solution. It will give you the confidence, the skills, and the background to merit everything from the first interview to the salary you negotiate.</p>

<p>Even more concretely, work with a non-profit organization (or another organization that doesn’t have the economic power to hire programmers or data scientists) to create a project that is meaningful for the organization and also shows off your skills. It’s a great way to do demonstrative and meaningful work while also aiding an organization that could use your help, and likely has problems people are paying attention to solving. Win-win.</p>

<p>Current Value vs Potential: Look for companies that will hire you for your potential. It’s important to be upfront about your grit, self-sufficiency, and ability to hit the ground running. Luckily, with disciplines like data science, the market is on your side. Sometimes companies can spring for a Junior Data Scientist and invest in your growth, which is really what you wanted from the beginning.</p>

<p>Everyone will tell you this, but I work on product so I’ll underline it even more strongly: Learn to write production-level code. The more technical you are, the more valuable you are. Being able to write production code makes you imminently hirable and trainable.</p>

<p><em>[</em>NB: Don’t think for a minute that I don’t believe in the tenets of a true liberal education - quite the contrary. I continue to read philosophy and history, in part because we cannot draw fully upon the knowledge of man without doing so. These are essential elements to being a purposed, ethical, and effective person - but they don’t directly accelerate a career. The true liberal education has nothing to do with market forces, and never should. Higher Education as it exists today and Liberal Education should be held as wholly uniquely-motivated institutions.]*</p>

<h5 id="leanpub-auto-how-was-your-self-taught-path-to-becoming-a-data-scientist-received-by-company-recruiters-what-advice-would-you-share-with-entrepreneurial-individuals-who-are-interested-in-the-field">How was your self-taught path to becoming a data scientist received by company recruiters? What advice would you share with entrepreneurial individuals who are interested in the field?</h5>

<p>Talk with people who can recognize hustle and grit, and not necessarily those who are looking to match a pattern drawn from your previous experience. Often, these kinds of people run startups.</p>

<p>Recruiters gave me a very real response: They didn’t see my course of self-study as legitimate. It’s hard to give yourself a stamp of approval and be taken seriously. I wouldn’t recommend that just anyone do what I did - it will take a while for autodidactism to become more accepted, and maybe it will never be a primary pattern. But maybe people like me can help expose this as a viable way to advance professionally. I know that great companies like Coursera will continue to innovate on these new forms of education, keep quality high, and democratize access.</p>

<p>
  <strong>tl;dr</strong>
</p>

<p>If you want to get to the next level, wherever your next level may be, it’s possible to pave your own road that leads you there. It’s a monstrously tough road, but it’s your road.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
